Energy restriction and potential energy restriction mimetics Sibylle Nikolai*, Kathrin Pallauf, Patricia Huebbe and Gerald Rimbach Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany Abstract Energy restriction (ER; also known as caloric restriction) is the only nutritional intervention that has repeatedly been shown to increase lifespan in model organisms and may delay ageing in humans. In the present review we discuss current scientiﬁc literature on ER and its molecular, metabolic and hormonal effects. Moreover, criteria for the classiﬁcation of substances that might induce positive ER-like changes without having to reduce energy intake are summarised. Additionally, the putative ER mimetics (ERM) 2-deoxy-D-glucose, metformin, rapamycin, resveratrol, spermidine and lipoic acid and their suggested molecular targets are discussed. While there are reports on these ERM candidates that describe lifespan extension in model organisms, data on longevity-inducing effects in higher organisms such as mice remain controversial or are missing. Furthermore, some of these candidates produce detrimental side effects such as immunosuppression or lactic acidosis, or have not been tested for safety in long-term studies. Up to now, there are no known ERM that could be recommended without limitations for use in humans. Key words: Energy restriction: Energy restriction mimetics: Healthy ageing: Longevity: Lifespan Introduction Overweight and obesity are emerging problems all over the world – not only developed countries but also recently indus- trialised and developing countries are struggling under the burden of this epidemic(1). In Germany, one in ﬁve adults suffers from severe obesity, indicated by a BMI of 30 kg/m2 or higher(2) and even 60 % of German adults are overweight (i.e. with a BMI of 25 kg/m2 or higher)(3). Apart from limitations in everyday life such as impaired physical performance or dyspnoea caused by obesity, the incidence of associated disorders severely increases the more body weight is gained(4–6). In the past, chronic diseases like type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hypertension, CVD and cancer were mostly observed in the elderly. Nowadays, many young individuals are also constrained by these pathologies because of excess weight(7). It is estimated that the worldwide mortality from chronic diseases will increase up to 66 % in 2030(1). For this reason, food and health agencies such as the USDA (United States Department of Health and Human Services and United States Department of Agriculture) recommend choosing foods high in vitamins and minerals but low (to moderate) in energy density in order to decrease the risk of such diet-related diseases. Indeed, by changing Western eating patterns, enhancing physical activity levels and avoiding tobacco use, the risk of CVD and T2DM as well as of cancer could be reduced by 80 and 40 %, respectively(1). It has been hypothesised that ageing and its associated dis- eases may be the result of increasing amounts of altered nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, structurally aberrant proteins, and oxidised lipids that lead to structural and functional impairment of single cells and whole organisms(8,9). This may impede dealing with and recovering from endogenous and environ- mental stress, thereby favouring the development of age-related chronic diseases(10,11). In the following, current literature on energy restriction (ER; also known as caloric restriction), the most promising method to counteract obesity and ageing, and on its underlying mechanisms such as anti-inﬂammatory and antioxidant effects is reviewed. Additionally, substances that have been discussed as potentially mimicking ER are also discussed. Energy restriction and lifespan in model organisms ER, a reduction in energy intake of 20 % (mild ER) to 50 % (severe ER)(12,13) without a reduction in essential nutrients or malnutrition(14), was shown to reduce obesity and prevent premature onset of chronic ageing-associated diseases(15). Up to now ER is the only intervention which reliably increases lifespan in various model organisms(10). In an early study in 1935, rats on a hypoenergetic diet showed increased lifespan(16). Since then several studies have Nutrition Research Reviews * Corresponding author: Sibylle Nikolai, fax +49 431 880 2628, email nikolai@foodsci.uni-kiel.de Abbreviations: 2DG, 2-deoxy-d-glucose; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; ER, energy restriction; ERM, energy restriction mimetic; FOXO, forkhead box O; GH, growth hormone; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; mTORC1, mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1; NIA, United States National Institute on Aging; Nrf2, nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2) like 2; p-AMPK, phosphorylated AMPK; PGC1α, PPAR γ coactivator 1-α; ROS, reactive oxygen species; RSV, resveratrol; SIRT, sirtuin; SOD, superoxide dismutase; SPD, spermidine; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; UCP, uncoupling protein. Nutrition Research Reviews (2015), 28, 100–120 doi:10.1017/S0954422415000062 © The Authors 2015 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press veriﬁed these ﬁndings in model organisms extending from yeast(17) over invertebrate species like Caenorhabditis elegans(18) and Drosophila melanogaster(19) to rodents and primates(20–22). Conversely, there are reports that ER may also shorten lifespan in mammals(23) and a meta-analysis by Swindell(24) concluded that the ER-induced lifespan increase in rodents depended on the genotype. Furthermore, it is ques- tionable whether ad libitum-fed animals are the adequate controls for ER studies because ad libitum intake can lead to overweight and consequently shorten lifespan(25). In contrast to an earlier study in rhesus monkeys at the Wisconsin National Primate Research Center(22), Mattison et al.(26) found, on the one hand, that ER did not affect the animals’ lifespan. On the other hand, the ER-fed monkeys showed a later onset of age-related diseases than the ad libitum-fed controls and therefore an increased healthspan. In the Biosphere 2 study in the early 1990s a small number of human subjects unintentionally had limited access to food for about 2 years. Being sealed into a materially closed ecosystem these human subjects were farming and processing their own food, resulting in an energy-limited but nutrient-dense diet. This ER of up to 30 % led to phenotypes similar to those known from ER studies in model organisms(27–29). As with rodents and primates, the human subjects displayed decreased body weight and temperature, lowered fasting glucose and insulin levels, and reduced BMR and blood pressure compared with before the study(27,29). A 25 % reduction in energy intake for 6 months in the statistically high-powered CALERIE (Comprehensive Assessment of the Long-term Effects of Reducing Intake of Energy) study by the United States National Institute on Aging (NIA) showed results consistent with these ﬁndings. Although there are few data on ER in humans, it is known that the inhabitants of Okinawa Island traditionally consumed a modi- ﬁed Japanese diet containing about 20 % less energy than the Western high-fat diet. Interestingly, the number of centenarians in this population is 4- to 5-fold higher than in Western popu- lations and the Okinawan life expectancy is the highest in the world(30). However, in the Okinawan population aged under 65 years, there seems to be a trend towards a lower life expec- tancy compared with the older generation. This is most probably due to a change from traditional dietary patterns to energy-dense Western-type diets that was initiated in the 1960s(31). Physical appearance during energy restriction In addition to a reduction in body weight and fat content(22,32), body temperature also decreases under ER(33,34). In model organisms on a lifelong ER, a decline in growth and delayed sexual maturity occurred(34) possibly resulting in reduced reproduction rates. In these hypoenergetic-fed animals, a shift from development and reproduction towards maintenance can be observed. Interestingly, changes in activity levels upon ER feeding seem to be species dependent. While rodents under- going ER showed higher activity levels than ad libitum-fed controls(35), primates displayed mostly unchanged activity patterns compared with the controls(32,34). Fig. 1 summarises some of the suggested targets that energy restriction might address. Nutrition Research Reviews Energy expenditure • Metabolic rate • Autophagy • Mitochondrial turnover • Oxidative status • Adiponection • Glucose and insulin • TAG/lipids • Triiodthyronine • Free plasma steroids • Advanced glycation endproducts • Lifespan • Bone mineral density • Blood pressure • Body temperature • Body weight and fat • Body size/height • Time to sexual maturity • Reproduction rates • Inflammation • Physical activity • (Adaptive) thermogenesis Energy restriction Blood parameters Development • Shift from reproduction to maintenance Phenotype Molecular processes Fig. 1. Schematic overview of the suggested targets that energy restriction might address. Energy restriction and its mimetics 101 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press Blood parameters during energy restriction As expected from epidemiological studies, in rodent models reduced body weight in the ER groups was accompanied by a decreased risk of developing age-related diseases such as T2DM(36). In initially overweight as well as in normal-weight subjects, fasting plasma glucose and insulin were reduced(37,38) whereas adiponectin levels(39) and insulin sensitivity increased(40) upon energy restriction. Interestingly, consuming energy- restricted diets even reversed existing diabetic changes like insulin resistance(41). ER regimens were also seen to attenuate hypertension(42) and hyperlipidaemia(43). The latter observation might also be due to changes in nutrient utilisation. Since, in order to compensate for reduced glucose intake upon ER, gluconeo- genesis from lipids and amino acids is induced(44). In contrast, as shown in rats, glycolysis is reduced under ER(45). Moreover, improved glucoregulation reduces glycation reactions, in which blood glucose molecules react with amino acids, proteins or nucleic acids in Maillard reactions to form advanced glycation endproducts (AGE)(46). These can bind to their receptors (receptors for AGE; RAGE) in various tissues, thereby inducing renal, vascular or neurological changes that are observed in ageing-related pathologies(40,47). Thus, reducing blood glucose levels via ER might contribute to low- ering the risk of developing age-dependent diseases such as CVD(48), neurodegenerative diseases(49) and cancer(50,51). While insulin secretion is decreased, plasma concentrations of glucocorticoids usually increase when food intake is limited(52). As to be expected from reduced growing rates and the slowing down of maturation, levels of anabolic hormones like leptin and insulin, testosterone, oestradiol(53) and follicle- stimulating hormone(32) decreased upon ER in several species. However, changes in levels of steroid hormones seem to be dependent on the species, as no changes were seen in primates. In contrast, plasma concentrations of the catabolic adipo- nectin(39) and of the steroid hormone-binding protein(54) tend to be increased by ER. Probably, increased steroid hormone- binding protein levels contribute to the reduced availability of gonadal steroids like testosterone and oestradiol as observed in human subjects undergoing ER regimens(55,56). Similar to leptin, insulin and testosterone, triiodothyronine (T3) consistently declined in rodents(57), primates(58) and human subjects(28,59,60) upon ER feeding. Remarkably, reduced T3 levels ﬁt well with the reduced body temperatures of ER-fed subjects, as the positive correlation of T3 and body temperature has been known for several years(61). In dwarf mice a deﬁciency in thyroid-stimulating hormone resulted in hypothyroidism(62) which causes decreased T3 levels. These mice had increased lifespans that were probably mediated by reduced metabolic rates(62) and a subsequent reduction in the generation of reac- tive oxygen species (ROS). However, adaptive thermogenesis might be increased upon ER, as mRNA and protein concentra- tions of its main regulators uncoupling proteins (UCP) were increased in skeletal muscle of mice(63,64). Because of the increased energy utilisation for mitochondrial heat production – as mediated by increased UCP signalling – ROS production(65) and the resulting oxidative damage could potentially be decreased. Cellular processes affected by energy restriction Energy restriction and oxidative status Recently, an increasing number of researchers have become interested in the hormesis effect on healthy ageing(66). This phenomenon describes how a low dose of a stimulus (for example, ROS) induces a positive effect and a high dose of the same stimulus induces a negative effect(67). As far as ER is concerned, limiting energy supply can be seen as a factor causing mild stress in an organism which activates mechanisms of endogenous stress response, thereby improving the overall protection against stress(68,69). Consistently, enhanced expression of heat shock proteins and antioxidant enzymes under ER support this hypothesis(70). Since accumulated stress is observed in age-related disease, ER might enhance health- span and lifespan via hormesis(68). Although oxidative damage accumulates during ageing(71) and is characteristic of age-related diseases such as CVD(72), cancer(73) and neurodegenerative pathologies(74,75), it is not known whether increased ROS levels are the cause or a con- sequence of ageing. ER is assumed to alleviate the age-associated increase in oxi- dative stress(57,76), probably via improving endogenous stress response mechanisms(40) including several redox-sensitive tran- scription factors. Indeed, in mice undergoing ER antioxidant enzymes under the transcriptional control of the redox-sensitive transcription factor nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2) like 2 (Nrf2) such as NQO1 (NAD(P)H dehydrogenase, quinone 1)(77) were induced. Nrf2 protects the organism from the harmful effects of oxidative stress(78). Nrf2 transactivates the expression of genes encoding enzymes that may prevent oxidative damage to cellular structures or remove damaged molecules(79). Apart from NQO1, Nrf2 also induces the transcription of phase II enzymes like glutathione S-transferases in mice(78). Moreover, Nrf2 knock-out mice showed decreased expressions of the antioxidant enzymes catalase, haeme oxygenase 1 (HO1) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) 1(80). By stimulating proteasomal degradation, Nrf2 can further reduce the burden of oxidatively damaged macromolecules(81). Interestingly, the expression and transcriptional activity of Nrf2 were shown to decline in tissues of ageing rodents(82,83) and ER was shown to enhance the activity of Nrf2. In mice under ER several Nrf2 target genes were up-regulated, which protected these mice from tumorigenesis. However, this anti-cancer effect was diminished in Nrf2 knock- out mice(84), suggesting a contribution of Nrf2 to the health- promoting effects induced by ER(85). Additionally, oxidative damage to macromolecules seems to be reduced upon ER(76), but these beneﬁcial effects often occur only after several months of ER(86). However, in lifespan studies, mutants expressing higher levels of antioxidant enzymes did not always live longer than the con- trols. While a SOD1 knock-out decreased lifespan in mice(87), higher activity of SOD1 (CuZnSOD) did not promote longevity in mice(88). Although higher levels of oxidative damaged DNA could be detected in animals with reduced SOD2 (MnSOD) activity, a SOD2 knock-out trial did not reveal different lifespans in transgenic v. control mice(89). Similarly, supplementing mice with Nutrition Research Reviews 102 S. Nikolai et al. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press antioxidants like glutathione(90), vitamin C(91), lipoic acid or coenzyme Q10(92) did not increase lifespan compared with the untreated controls. However, in the case of catalase, overexpression of this antioxidant enzyme extended lifespan in mice(93). Energy restriction and inﬂammation While Nrf2, which is thought to be protective against age- related diseases(85), was shown to decrease with age(82,83) the transcription factors NF-κB, activator protein-1 and hypoxia inducible factor-1 were shown to be up-regulated age-depen- dently and in the presence of ROS(10). When activated, they contribute to the development of inﬂammation and associated disorders, for example, arthritis(94), cancer, atherosclerosis or neurodegenerative diseases(95,96). NF-κB leads to the expression of pro-inﬂammatory genes encoding cytokines, chemokines and inﬂammatory cell adhe- sion which in turn worsen the ROS overload and further pro- mote the activity of NF-κB(97). ER consistently decreased the transcriptional activity of NF-κB and hypoxia inducible factor-1(98–100). However, the precise mechanism of how ROS increases the activity of these transcription factors is largely unknown(10,101). Most likely the reduced load of ROS contributes to a well-balanced cellular redox state, thereby potentially preventing the development of disadvantageous age-associated pathologies(10). Inﬂammation increases with age(102) and body weight(103) and is often related to tissue injury, organ dysfunction, ﬁbrosis, several chronic diseases and ageing in general(104). ER increased the anti-inﬂammatory hormones adiponectin, ghrelin and corticosteroids(66) and PPAR transcription factors as well as NF-κB inhibitor α(105,106) in the plasma of human sub- jects and rodents. In contrast, NF-κB targets such as inﬂammation-promoting PG, thromboxanes and other cyto- kines (TNFα, IL-6, inducible NO synthase, vascular cell adhe- sion molecule and intercellular adhesion molecule) were decreased(32,99,107,108). In line with these ﬁndings, a diet rich in fat and sugar may increase systemic inﬂammation(7). Energy restriction and mitochondrial metabolism The cellular energy suppliers mitochondria are very sensitive to oxidative damage and are a considerable ROS source them- selves(109). Most importantly, these double-membraned orga- nelles contain a subset of different proteins that generate ATP as an energy source for the organism. However, in the oxidation steps of the mitochondrial electron chain, superoxide radicals are formed from leaking electrons and molecular oxygen(110,111). Leakage of electrons and therefore basal ROS production increases once the mitochondria become old(109,112,113) and decreased efﬁciency in mitochondrial ATP production during ageing leads to less energy and more ROS(114), which in turn further damages mitochondria. Similar to other antioxidant defence mechanisms, the activity of the mitochondrial antioxidant defence enzyme SOD2 (MnSOD) also declines with increasing age(115), thereby favouring the vicious cycle of less efﬁcient enzymes in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. That leads to an increase in oxidative stress resulting in further mitochondrial destruction. Thus, it seems useful to promote mitochondrial turnover by enhancing biogenesis of new mitochondria and degradation of old and damaged ones. Biogenesis of mitochondria is a complex multistep interplay of various transcripts and proteins with nuclear, cytosolic and mitochondrial origin(116). It may be activated in response to different stimuli like nutrient supply, endocrine signals, growth factors and changes in tempera- ture(117). PPAR γ coactivator 1α (PGC1α) is thought to be the key modulator of mitochondrial biogenesis and function, as it regulates the activity of other important factors in mitochondrial biogenesis like nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 and oestrogen-related receptors(118). In turn, nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 may induce mitochondrial transcription factor A, which is essential in controlling the expression of mitochondrial genes(119). Oestrogen-related receptors target genes are thought to be involved in nutrient-degrading processes, oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial dynamics(118). ER was shown to induce mitochondrial biogenesis by enhancing the expression of PGC1α and nuclear respiratory factor 1 as well as their downstream target mitochondrial trans- cription factor A(120). Moreover, PGC1α seems to be involved in mitochondrial function as it enhanced the activity of respiratory chain enzyme complexes III and IV in a cell culture model(121). In line with these ﬁndings, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which is known to be up-regulated upon ER, was shown to affect mitochondrial development and metabolism positively(122). Importantly, ER-induced unselective and selective autopha- gic degradation may remove old and damaged mitochon- dria(123), thereby probably reducing oxidative stress. Indeed, ER enhanced mitochondrial turnover in mouse liver, measured as reduced mitochondrial half-life(124). Energy restriction and autophagic processes Autophagy is an intracellular, lysosomal degradation process that aims at recycling cell organelles, proteins and macromolecules. In all types of autophagy (macroautophagy, microautophagy and chaperone-mediated autophagy) the freight is sequestered and transported to lysosomes, where it is degraded by different hydrolases(125). While in macro- and microautophagy hetero- geneous cytoplasmic content is taken up into vesicles, chaperone-mediated autophagy is able to target, transport and degrade speciﬁc proteins(123,125,126). However, macroautophagy may also selectively incorporate cargo (such as mitochondria) into autophagosomes, which later fuse with lysosomes to form autolysosomes(127). In the (auto)lysosomes, acidic hydrolases shed organelles and molecules into their components. After transport back to the cytoplasm, these components can be reused for biosynthetic or energy-generating processes(128). Fig. 2 shows the major events of macroautophagy. For the best-studied type of autophagy, macroautophagy (in the following referred to as autophagy), it was shown that autophagy-related proteins (ATG) initiate and perform this lysosomal degradation pathway(125). These ATG are mostly activated under catabolic conditions. Many of them have been Nutrition Research Reviews Energy restriction and its mimetics 103 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press shown to be activated by sirtuins (SIRT) and/or inhibited by mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1), which are induced or repressed by ER, respectively(129–131). Consistently, ATG(10) such as the mammalian ATG8 homologue LC3(77) were induced upon ER treatment. The reason why autophagy is induced upon ER(8,77,132–134) is most probably because ER causes a shift from development and reproduction towards maintenance. Under these circumstances autophagy is necessary for recycling of cellular material required for rebuilding essential cell structures and for generating energy(8,133,134). Interestingly, in lifespan experi- ments the pro-longevity effect of ER depended on autophagy induction(132). In line with the ﬁnding that autophagy induction contributed to the pro-longevity effect of ER, autophagy was shown to decrease during the ageing process(135). By accelerating the turnover of proteins, membranes and other organelles, autophagy also contributes to maintaining efﬁciency of peroxisomes, ER and importantly mitochondria(132). Thus, active autophagy could possibly counteract the age-related increase in ROS generation/oxidative stress. This potentially reduces the risk for neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s or Parkinson’s in which the accumulation of redundant proteins, followed by functional impairments and the death of post-mitotic neurons are observed. As autophagy removes aggregation-prone redundant or damaged molecules(136) and apoptotic bodies(134), increased autophagy might attenuate the progress of neurode- generative diseases. Indeed, autophagy was found to be dysregulated in patients suffering from Alzheimer’s disease(137,138), Parkinson’s disease(139) and Huntington’s disease(140). Therefore, targeting autophagy induction, for example, by ER, seems to be a valuable strategy for delaying the onset of these diseases and increasing healthspan and lifespan. Molecular targets of energy restriction AMP-activated protein kinase In the case of limited energy supply, ATP levels decline and the AMP:ATP ratio increases which in turn activates, i.e. phosphorylates, the nutrient sensor AMPK(141). Thus, high levels of phosphorylated AMPK (p-AMPK) are indicative of low energy supply(142,143). Additionally, AMPK appears to be regu- lated by hormones like leptin and adiponectin, ghrelin and thyroxine(144). AMPK phosphorylation leads to activation of various downstream targets such as SIRT1, PGC1α and some forkhead box O (FOXO)(145–147). This in turn leads to deacetylation of transcription factors and other proteins, biogenesis of mitochon- dria and stress defence mechanisms. Additionally, AMPK was shown to inhibit the central kinase mTOR, which in its activated complex mTORC1 promotes cell growth and proliferation(141). Indeed, AMPK activation has been found to promote long- evity in model organisms. Whereas decreased AMPK activity reduced the lifespan of D. melanogaster(148), an increase in lifespan could be observed in yeast and C. elegans with acti- vated AMPK(145,148,149). However, the results concerning the effect of ER on AMPK activity are inconsistent. While some studies found increased p-AMPK in the heart, muscle and liver of lifelong ER-fed mice(150–152), others did not observe any changes in p-AMPK levels(153). Interesting insights come from studies that supplemented model organisms with substances that mimic ER. It could be shown that AMPK is necessary for the life-prolonging effect of such ER mimetics(154). Additionally, the deacetylase SIRT1 was also shown to be necessary for ER-mimetic-induced lifespan extension(155). Sirtuins Various studies have shown that SIRT1 is induced by ER(156–158). SIRT1 is part of the sirtuin family – a group of energy-sensing protein deacetylases(159). In an energy-dependent manner(160), SIRT1 regulates the activity of many proteins, for example, transcription factors, by changing their state of acetylation(161). Using NAD+ as a cofactor (the concentration of which rises upon limited nutrient supply), SIRT1 catalyses the transfer of a lysine-bound acetyl group from a protein substrate to NAD+, thereby forming nicotinamide, O-acetyl-ADP-ribose and the deacetylated substrate(162). Nutrition Research Reviews Phagophore Autophagosome Late autophagic vesicles Autolysosome Degradation Fusion Lysosome Endosomal compartments Elongation Fig. 2. Schematic overview of macroautophagy. A phagophore elongates, wraps around cytosolic components and closes to become an autophagosome. This structure fuses with endosomal vesicles to build late autophagic vesicles and finally fuses with a lysosome, thereby forming an autolysosome in which its inner membrane and its contents are degraded (adapted from Cantó & Auwerx(122)). 104 S. Nikolai et al. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press Via deacetylation of histones, SIRT1 might modulate the expression of several genes(163) involved in energy metabolism. Due to their lysine and arginine residues, histones are charged positively and they form tight complexes with the negatively charged DNA, thereby impeding the RNA polymerase access to the DNA. The acetylation of lysine and arginine residues in the histone weakens its interaction with the DNA(163,164), which renders the DNA sequences more susceptible for binding of the polymerase, leading to enhanced gene transcription. Thus, deacetylating histones might down-regulate gene expression(164). Additional substrates of SIRT1 include proteins that are involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and turnover. By deace- tylating PGC1α and thereby enhancing its activity(165), SIRT1 might induce mitochondrial biogenesis(166). Moreover, SIRT1 seems to enhance the activity of ATG5, 7 and 8(143), which promotes autophagy induction(143,160,167). Similar to ER, increased expression of SIRT1 (or its homo- logues) in yeast, C. elegans, D. melanogaster and mice enhanced lifespan(168–171). Mice overexpressing SIRT1 revealed an improved glucose homeostasis, including increased insulin sensitivity and were protected from developing T2DM(172). High-fat diet-fed mice with increased SIRT1 expression seemed to be resistant to the metabolic syndrome(173). Moreover, SIRT1 was shown to prevent metabolic syndrome-induced tumour development(174). Via interacting with and inhibiting the binding sites of PPARγ (a transcription factor that regulates lipid metabolism), SIRT1 reduces the expression of its target genes in white adipocytes(175,176). Thus, SIRT1 may also inhibit lipid storage and enhance fat mobilisation in white adipose tissue upon ER(176). Conversely, some studies found that ER increased lifespan even in the absence of SIRT1 and other SIRT(177,178). It could be possible that the signalling proteins of the interdependent net- work SIRT1, AMPK and PGC1α can in part compensate for each other(147). PPARγ coactivator 1α The key target of Sirt1 and AMPK, the co-activator of the transcription factor PPARγ PGC1α(146,179), is also central for mediating the ER-induced lifespan-enhancing effect(180). When activated, PGC1α might even prevent age-related undesirable changes(181,182) in skeletal and heart muscle and in adipose tissue. Apart from its role in mitochondrial biogenesis and function(166) in all cell types, in skeletal muscle PGC1α is thought to affect the type of muscle ﬁbre(183). Furthermore, PGC1α stimulates adaptive thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue(184). PGC1α activity appears to prevent loss of mito- chondrial function in muscles, protects from distributional and functional changes of adipose tissue and affects the energy metabolism by favouring lipids instead of carbohydrates as a main energy source(182). While some ER studies found that nuclear PGC1α levels (and subsequent increase in mitochondrial biogenesis) increased under limited nutrient supply(181,185), others did not observe any differences in nuclear PGC1α protein concentra- tions in rodent tissues such as heart, liver, white adipose tissue and brain(186). However, in mice the SIRT1-mediated activation of PGC1α also led to increased gluconeogenesis, enhanced glucose mobilisation and reduced levels of glycolysis(165). Forkhead box O FOXO transcription factors were also shown to be activated by SIRT1(165). FOXO are involved in stress defence and energy metabolism(187,188) and induce the transcription of genes that promote autophagy and cell death(189,190). Apart from deacetylation, which activates FOXO, they can be regulated negatively by phosphorylation(191). After being phosphorylated, FOXO are shuttled from the nucleus into the cytoplasm, which reduces the expression of FOXO target genes(192). Insulin-like growth factor 1 The IGF-1 signalling pathway is also negatively affected under ER(32,193). The reduced IGF-1 signalling observed under ER(194) is usually accompanied by lowered growth hormone (GH) concentrations(32), since GH promotes IGF expression(62). An ER-induced reduction in plasma levels of free IGF-1 was shown to be pro-apoptotic and anti-proliferative(195) and is therefore potentially chemopreventive. Indeed, GH(196) and IGF-1 receptor(197,198) deﬁciencies were shown to increase lifespan, whereas GH overexpression led to premature ageing and shortened lifespan in mice(196). Dwarf mice that display reduced IGF-1/GH signalling lived considerably longer compared with normal-sized wild-type mice, mainly because they had a reduced incidence of neoplasms(199). Furthermore, it was shown that low IGF-1 levels were related to survival in long-lived humans(200). Additionally to decreased levels of growth factors and hormones, the reduction of insulin secretion upon ER feeding could also account for its chemopreventive effect. Hyperinsulinaemia is strongly related to high levels of oxidative stress(201) and reduced rates of autophagy(202), leading to increased generation of damaged macromolecules and decreased degradation of damaged proteins. Another consequence of increased IGF-1 signalling is the induction of phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase, which in turn activates protein kinase B by phosphorylation(203), thereby activating mTOR. Mammalian target of rapamycin mTOR is a seronine/threonine protein kinase that is involved in several regulatory processes. It is suggested that it inﬂuences cell growth, including proliferation, transcription and protein synthesis, as well as cell survival(204). Due to its central role in proliferation and cellular growth processes, mTOR has long been studied as a molecular target for cancer therapy(205). Inhibiting mTOR activity genetically or pharmacologically increased lifespan in yeast(206,207), C. elegans(208,209) and D. melanogaster(210). Consistent with decreased IGF-1 and GH signalling(199), which are upstream regulators of mTOR, mTOR signalling is also reduced in dwarf(211) and ER-fed mice(212). Inhibition of mTOR Nutrition Research Reviews Energy restriction and its mimetics 105 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press leads to autophagy induction(213,214) possibly via depho- sphorylation of ATG13 and the mammalian Atg1 homologues Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinases 1 and 2, which are essential for mTOR-dependent autophagy(130,131). Limitations and adverse effects of energy restriction Evaluating ER as a potential pro-longevity treatment, it is necessary to keep in mind some of its adverse effects (see Table 1). First of all, it seems almost infeasible to follow a lifelong ER regimen that requires a reduction of energy intake of up to 40 %(215) without being malnourished at any time. Another critical issue in ER experiments might be decreased bone mineral density as observed in primates and rodents(32) as well as in a long-term ER study in human subjects(216). Deﬁciencies in skin wound healing – seen in restrictively fed rats(217) – and decline in concentrations of gonadal steroids(54) could impair health-related quality of life. Furthermore, symptoms such as starving, cold and reduced libido persist during long-term ER and the social aspect of eating food should not be neglected(36). Importantly, ER-fed old mice seem to be more susceptible to infections(218), which could even decrease lifespan. An alternative to ER is the ‘alternate day fasting’ regimen. In this modiﬁed ER concept, dietary intake is partially or com- pletely limited every other day, whereas food consumption remains unrestricted on the remaining days(219). Although it could be expected that a higher food intake in ad libitum phases compensates or even overcompensates for energy shortage during the restriction days, several health-promoting effects were seen in alternate day fasting compared with control groups with unlimited food access(220–223). However, this nutritional concept also seems hard to follow in modern society and possible side effects need to be studied in more detail. Energy restriction mimetics Because of its limitations, alternatives to ER that could prevent or retard the onset of ageing-related pathologies to a similar extent as ER are being sought. Since it takes very long to gen- erate data on the inﬂuence of dietary regimens, supplements or pharmacological substances on human lifespan and age-related diseases there is only limited information on general ageing patterns in speciﬁc organs and tissues. Using broad-range microarrays, gene expression proﬁles associated with the ageing process have been identiﬁed. By comparing these patterns of aged individuals to subjects undergoing ER and those supplemented with potential ERM, the anti-ageing potential of candidate substances can easily be assessed(92). Results of ongoing studies identifying potential ERM are pub- lished regularly by the NIA Interventions Testing Program. A comprehensive review on ER effects with a focus on epigenetic changes was recently published by Chung et al.(224). Moreover, Ingram et al.(225) have established criteria that should be met before a substance is considered an ERM. First, candidate sub- stances should not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence long-term dietary intake in order to prevent positive results merely because of reducing energy consumption. Second, the candidate substance should induce metabolic, hormonal and physiological changes that are comparable with the effects of ER. And third, it should induce an ER-like stress response. It is hypothesised that through meeting these three criteria, dietary supplementation with the candidate substance may have a positive inﬂuence on healthspan and lifespan(226). According to Selman, the elonga- tion of healthspan by putative ERM candidates should be more emphasised(227). The criterion proposed by Lane et al.(228) resembles these points. They state that without altering food intake the potential ERM should target energy metabolism since this seems to be the underlying mechanism of the beneﬁcial ER effects. Putative energy restriction mimetic candidate substances ERM target various molecules and processes that have been described in the ‘Cellular processes affected by energy restric- tion’ section. A putative ERM that targets glucoregulation and inhibits glycolysis is the glucose analogue 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG)(36). Recently, glucosamine has been discussed as mimicking a low-carbohydrate diet and thus potentially acting as an ERM(229). Further ERM candidates are the biguanides that have been used in the treatment of T2DM since they lower insulin/IGF-1 signalling and activate AMPK(36). While formerly phenformin and butformin were used alongside metformin, nowadays only metformin is approved for T2DM treatment. Thus, despite studies showing a prolonged lifespan in phenformin- and butformin-supplemented rats(230,231), metformin currently is the best studied biguanide in terms of mimicking ER. Oxaloacetate seems to activate AMPK-related pathways, thereby increasing lifespan in a nematode model. However, supplementation trials in mice did not reveal any pro-longevity effect of oxaloacetate(232). Nutrition Research Reviews Table 1. ‘Side effects’ of energy restriction Negative effect seen upon energy restriction Model organism in which side effect was seen References Immunosuppression (increased sensitivity to viral/bacterial infections) Mus musculus (218) Loss of bone mineral density Rodents, primates and man (32) Impaired wound healing Rattus norvegicus (217) Delayed sexual maturity and reduced levels of sexual hormones Macaca mulatta Mus musculus (34,54) Decreased body temperature R. norvegicus (33) Social exclusion and missing feasibility of energy restriction Man (36) 106 S. Nikolai et al. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press Another substance class suggested as possessing pro- longevity effects are anti-lipolytic compounds such as the nicotinic acid derivative acipimox(233) or 3,5- dimethylpyr- azole(234). Additionally to their lowering effect on plasma lipids, they are thought to be glucose- and insulin-decreasing as well as autophagy-inducing agents. These observations all point to potential ER-like effects. Unfortunately, studies looking at life- span upon/after treatment with anti-lipolytic drugs are rare(36). Further ERM candidates can be found among SIRT stimulators, particularly stilbenes. Systemic SIRT1 activators are known for their metabolism-stimulating and body fat-reducing effects(235). The best-studied member of this group is resveratrol (RSV), which has been shown to increase lifespan in some species. Nicotinamide might also be considered a putative ERM since it was shown to activate SIRT. Interestingly, nicotinamide and RSV induce autophagy which might contribute to their ER-mimicking potential(236). Autophagy-inducing agents might also promote ER-like phenotypes independently of SIRT regulation. Spermidine (SPD) was shown to induce autophagy and thereby increase lifespan in some species without affecting SIRT(133). Another target molecule for ERM is the proliferation and cell growth-promoting kinase mTOR. Indeed, supple- mentation experiments with the pharmacological mTOR inhi- bitor rapamycin produced promising results. Furthermore, agents that affect mitochondrial biogenesis or the circadian rhythm may mediate ER-mimicking effects. Antioxidants such as lipoic acid that reduce ROS production by improving mitochondrial performance or increasing the pro- duction of endogenous antioxidants are also interesting putative ERM. Because of its inﬂuence on the circadian rhythm, mela- tonin might be helpful in managing body weight and preventing chronic diseases and premature deaths(237). Sometimes anorectics like amphetamines are discussed as ERM candidates(36). But due to their considerable reduction of food and consequently energy intake, anorectics cannot be considered ERM according to the criteria mentioned above(226,228,230). Postulated mechanisms and potential limitations of the best-studied and most promising energy restriction mimetics The following section will focus on postulated mechanisms and potential limitations of the best-studied and most promising ERM as found in recent literature (for a summary, see Table 2). 2-Deoxy-D-glucose 2DG (Fig. 3) was one of the ﬁrst substances discussed as a possible ERM(238). As a glucose analogue it differs from glucose only in that it lacks one hydroxyl group at C2(13). After intestinal absorption and entering the circulation, 2DG is taken up into cells using the same transporters as glucose. 2DG is phos- phorylated immediately by a hexokinase and accumulates intracellularly since it cannot be metabolised by phospho- hexose isomerase(40). Thereby, it competitively inhibits glucose utilisation, reduces the amounts of available energy(239) and might consequently mimic the effects of ER(13). Nutrition Research Reviews Table 2. Potential energy restriction mimetic (ERM) candidate substances, their underlying molecular mechanisms, organisms in which the substances prolonged lifespan and limitations or adverse effects ERM candidate substance Molecular mechanism underlying the pro-longevity effect Model organism, in which lifespan increase was shown Limitations or adverse effects References 2-Deoxy-D- glucose Inhibition of glucose utilisation Caenorhabditis elegans Cardiotoxicity. No lifespan increase in healthy mammals (13,40,142,245) Metformin AMPK activation C. elegans, Mus musculus Lactic acidosis (231,252,253,256) Rapamycin mTOR inhibition Saccharomyces cerevisiae, C. elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, M. musculus Immunosuppression (206,266–268,336) Resveratrol SIRT1 activation, AMPK activation, antioxidant S. cerevisiae, C. elegans, D. melanogaster, Nothobranchius furzeri No lifespan increase in healthy mammals on standard chow (170,274,279–281,283) Spermidine Autophagy induction S. cerevisiae, C. elegans, D. melanogaster, M. musculus, human immune cells High polyamine levels may promote tumour progression, long-term studies in mammals missing (8,133,291,313) Lipoic acid Antioxidant C. elegans, D. melanogaster No lifespan increase in ad libitum-fed, healthy mammals (12,92,318–320) AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin, SIRT1, sirtuin 1. Energy restriction and its mimetics 107 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press Indeed, in rodents, adding 2DG to the diet led to ER-similar phenotypes(32) including decreased body weight, blood glucose(240), insulin(241), body temperature(242) and heart rate(241). Moreover, 2DG was shown to induce protection against oxidative stress(243). Additionally, application of 2DG elevated protein levels of SIRT1 and p-AMPK in MCF-7 cancer cells(142). Since the inhibition of glycolytic processes by 2DG is followed by a limitation of cellular energy supply, ATP levels are reduced and subsequently the AMP:ATP ratio is increased leading to AMPK activation which increases the NAD+:NADH ratio and activates SIRT1(244). In fact, Schulz et al.(245) reported enhanced mean and maximum lifespan of C. elegans upon 2DG supplementation. However, these results could not be veriﬁed in mammals. Long- term studies in rodents revealed cardiotoxic effects of 2DG treatment at concentrations which were necessary for ER-like effects(13). In a long-term feeding trial in rats, 2DG was shown to reduce lifespan dose-dependently(13). However, at lower concentrations which did not seem toxic, 2DG exerted health- promoting effects in a 5-week supplementation study in tumour-prone rats where it inhibited cancer growth(142). In conclusion, 2DG-induced ER-like phenotypes in labora- tory animals are possibly outweighed by its cardiomyopathic effects observed in some studies. Toxicity thresholds should therefore be considered when planning long-term or even lifelong 2DG supplementation studies. Thus, further studies on dose-dependent efﬁciency and toxicity are needed. Metformin The biguanide metformin (Fig. 4) has been used for treating diabetes for a long time(246). Due to its potential of inducing ER- like effects, metformin has been considered an ERM candidate substance(231). Metformin was shown to suppress gluconeo- genesis and promote insulin sensitivity and glycolysis in diabetic subjects(246,247). Moreover, intestinal glucose absorp- tion and plasma glucose and lipid concentrations were decreased(248). In different tumour-prone rodent models and in diabetic patients incidence and progression of cancer were decreased by metformin(36,231,249,250). Additionally, risk factors for the development of CVD were reduced upon metformin treat- ment(251). Most probably, the delay in the onset of chronic diseases such as cancer and hypertension is the main reason for the longevity-promoting effect seen in C. elegans and mice(231,252). Interestingly, metformin caused a reduction in body weight in several studies without signiﬁcantly decreasing energy intake(6,231). Since a reduction in body weight is associated with an increased AMPK activation, it seems reasonable to assume a contribution of AMPK to the beneﬁcial effects of metformin. Indeed, the levels of p-AMPK were found to be elevated upon metformin supplementation(6,253). Potential longevity- promoting effects of AMPK and its downstream targets have been described earlier in this article. Metformin probably addresses further targets that also con- tribute to the observed increase in lifespan(248). In rodent models metformin was seen to mimic the hepatic and muscular trans- criptional ER response(6,254,255). These gene expression data indicate improved mitochondrial function, glucose and lipid metabolism, reduced apoptotic rates and inﬂammation, as well as enhanced stress response. In particular, mRNA expression and nuclear protein levels of the central antioxidant transcription factor Nrf2 were found to be up-regulated. Additionally, mRNA concentrations of its downstream targets SOD, NQO1 and NQO2 were elevated compared with the control animals. In contrast, expression of pro-inﬂammatory genes like NF-κB seemed decreased after metformin treatment(6). Despite these promising effects regarding the delay of the ageing process, some impairments of chronic metformin appli- cation have to be taken into account. Metformin is suggested as causing lactic acidosis when applied at higher doses for a longer period(256). Indeed, microarray analyses revealed increased mRNA concentrations of cytosolic lactate dehydrogenase (a key enzyme in lactic acid generation) in the liver and muscle of metformin-supplemented mice(6). However, metformin was applied at doses that were higher than the doses used in human subjects and the toxicity of metformin seems to depend on the dose. Current meta-analyses and reviews on metformin-treated T2DM patients concluded that the increased incidence of lactic acidosis more probably resulted from an underlying systemic dysfunction than from the metformin treatment(257,258). Moreover, metformin supplementation may be contraindicated in individuals suffering from renal diseases(259) since metformin induced renal failure in rodents when applied at high concentrations. Despite metformin being a promising ERM candidate, supplementation studies in healthy mammals have not always observed a clear lifespan-enhancing effect(226). For example, a study in healthy rats supplemented with metformin failed to show a pro-longevity effect(231), whereas a study in C57BL/6 mice showed longevity- promoting effects after metformin treatment(6). Rapamycin Rapamycin (Fig. 5), a complex macrolide antibiotic, has been used because of its immunosuppressive effects(260) after organ Nutrition Research Reviews OH O OH HO HO Fig. 3. Chemical structure of 2-deoxy-D-glucose. CH3 H3C NH NH NH NH2 N HCl Fig. 4. Chemical structure of metformin. 108 S. Nikolai et al. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press transplantations and because of its antiproliferative properties in cancer treatment(261,262). It has long been known that rapa- mycin exerts its antiproliferative effects via inhibition of mTOR signalling(263). Possibly, reduced mTOR activation decreases cancer risk and therefore prolongs survival in rapamycin- treated subjects. After discovering that deleterious TOR mutations in yeast promoted longevity, rapamycin was sug- gested as being an ERM in 2006(206). Indeed, it has been shown to decelerate senescence in vitro (in non-cancerous cell lines) and to possess lifespan-enhancing properties in several model organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae(206,264), C. elegans, D. melanogaster(265,266) and mice(266–268). How rapamycin interferes with mTOR is still under discussion. It has been hypothesised that rapamycin could bind to the heterodimer of the FK506 binding protein (FKBP)-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans-isomerase and the FKBP–rapamycin- associated protein. As such a heterotrimer, rapamycin might form complexes with mTOR, thereby inhibiting the formation of the complex mTORC1 and consequently cell proliferation and cell growth(269). Of interest, via inhibition of mTORC1, rapa- mycin was also shown to activate autophagy by up-regulating ATG1(266,270,271). Similar to ﬁndings from ER studies, prolonged lifespan induced by low doses of rapamycin was shown to depend on autophagy since rapamycin failed to enhance survival in atg1- and atg7-deﬁcient yeast(264). Several beneﬁcial outcomes of rapamycin administration, which may contribute to its pro-longevity effect, were observed in clinical and pre-clinical studies; namely, rapamycin seemed to alleviate the ageing-related diseases T2DM, the metabolic syndrome, ather- osclerosis, neurodegeneration and some kinds of cancer(272,273). However, body weight does not appear to be affected by rapamycin administration in mice fed standard diets(267). A limitation for rapamycin use as an ERM in humans results from its immunosuppressive action. While mice housed in spe- ciﬁc pathogen-free cages are unlikely to acquire infections despite being supplemented with immunosuppressants, humans may not beneﬁt from rapamycin due to severe bacterial or viral dis- eases(226). Moreover, animals treated with high rapamycin doses suffered from disturbed lipid or glucose homeostasis, skin irrita- tions, anaemia or impaired wound healing(248). Currently, studies are being carried out by the NIA to evaluate the most effective dose for promoting longevity in rodents(268). Resveratrol RSV (Fig. 6), a naturally occurring stilbene with antioxidant capacity(274), is mainly found in the skin of red grapes and therefore in red wine(275,276). Considerable amounts can also be detected in the roots of the medical plant Japanese knot- weed(277) and lower amounts in other fruits(278). In a NIA in vitro screening programme, RSV was identiﬁed as a SIRT1 activator in 2003. As SIRT1 seems to be a crucial player in ER- mediated lifespan extension, RSV was additionally tested for its lifespan-enhancing effects in S. cerevisiae. Due to the promising results of this trial(279) several studies have been conducted to verify the lifespan-enhancing properties of RSV. Indeed, RSV has shown survival enhancing effects in yeast, C. elegans, some D. melanogaster experiments(170), Nothobranchius furzeri (280) and high-fat diet-fed mice(281). Additionally, Morselli et al. proposed that RSV-mediated SIRT1 activation was followed by the induction of autophagy, which appears to be important for the lifespan-enhancing effect of ER(8). However, in other ﬂy studies(278,282) and in mice fed a stan- dard chow RSV did not prolong lifespan(268,283,284). Never- theless, in standard chow-fed mice supplemented with RSV several tissues revealed ER-like gene expression patterns, and anti-inﬂammatory, cardio- and osteoprotective effects as well as improved locomotor activity were observed(283). While it seems that SIRT1 might be responsible for the ben- eﬁcial effects of RSV(281) the exact mechanism of SIRT1 remains unclear. RSV may be binding to the regulatory(285) N-terminal subunit of SIRT1. Subsequently, a conformational change could take place, which in turn could lead to an enhanced SIRT1 deacetylation activity(279). Thus, the red wine polyphenol would seem to be an allosteric SIRT1 activator(8,279). Intriguingly, there are reports that the observed increase in SIRT1 deacetylase activity due to RSV could have been a result of a methodological error(286,287). If the enzyme activity mea- surement is not performed with ﬂuorochrome-conjugated sub- strates (as it usually is) but with natural substrates, RSV does not increase SIRT1 activity(286). However, Park et al. showed that RSV inhibits cAMP- degrading phosphodiesterases, which in turn leads to an activation of the AMPK pathway. They further argue that this increases NAD+ levels and that SIRT1 activation is a con- sequence of a RSV-mediated rise in NAD+ levels(288). These ﬁndings could explain why Pacholec et al. could not detect SIRT1 activation when measuring the enzyme activity in vitro(286). Interestingly, experiments in knockout animals have shown that apart from SIRT1(170) AMPK is also necessary for the pro-longevity effect of RSV(154). The beneﬁcial effects of RSV on insulin Nutrition Research Reviews HO HO H3C H3C H3C H3C H3C H3C O O O O O O O O O O N CH3 CH3 CH3 CH3 OH Fig. 5. Chemical structure of rapamycin. HO OH OH Fig. 6. Chemical structure of resveratrol. Energy restriction and its mimetics 109 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press sensitivity, motor function, mitochondrial performance(159,281) as well as decreased body weight(154,159) were not seen in AMPK- deﬁcient animals(154). A recent publication has described a mechanism for AMPK activation by RSV in vitro that does not depend on SIRT1 but on the tyrosyl transfer-RNA synthetase. RSV may ﬁt into the active site of the tyrosyl transfer-RNA synthetase, thereby leading to nuclear translocation of this enzyme and con- sequently activation of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 which in turn could activate downstream targets such as AMPK, FOXO and SIRT. Intriguingly, this happened at up to 100-fold lower doses than in previous studies(289). In contrast to many other ERM candidate substances, hardly any adverse effects have been reported for RSV so far. Only a study applying very high RSV doses observed cases of pre- mature death(290). However, it needs to be kept in mind that the efﬁciency of RSV in reducing mortality rates in healthy mam- mals and the appropriate dose of RSV for supplementation are still under discussion. Spermidine Spermidine (SPD; Fig. 7) is a naturally occurring polyamine that is essential for various cellular processes. Along with other endogenous polyamines such as spermine and putrescin it was shown to modulate various cellular processes such as pro- liferation, differentiation and cell death(291). Looking at particular polyamines, putrescine and cadaverine turn out to be rather negatively annotated molecules since they are enhanced in tissues in chronic diseases such as cancer(292), Parkinson’s(293) and pancreatitis(294). In contrast, SPD seems to be protective against age-related pathological changes(133). Spermine and SPD have already been described as exerting anti-inﬂammatory effects(295,296). Additionally, their levels were shown to be reduced in Alzheimer’s disease(297). Thus, the restoration of SPD and spermine levels might ameliorate Alz- heimer’s pathology. Moreover, due to its anti-inﬂammatory properties, SPD has been suggested for the treatment of mul- tiple sclerosis(298) and sepsis(299). As the endogenous synthesis of SPD declines with age(300,301), supplementation with SPD could increase the plasma concentrations at a higher age(291). Food rich in SPD includes soya and other beans, green tea and mush- rooms(302,303). SPD rich diets are consumed traditionally in Asian(304) and Mediterranean(305) regions. Recently, elevated SPD relative to total polyamine con- centrations have been observed in the plasma of centenarians compared with younger counterparts(306). Consistently, SPD supplementation in aged mice(291), S. cerevisiae, C. elegans, D. melanogaster and human immune cells(133) increased lifespan. Some researchers assume SPD to exert its longevity- promoting effects via induction of autophagy(8,133). Autophagy is known to be reduced at a higher age(134,307), and seems to counteract senescence when induced(307,308). In vitro experiments revealed that SPD treatment inhibited the activity of histone acetyltransferases in yeast and mouse liver extracts(8,133). Gene expression depends on the acetylation state of histones. The negatively charged chromatin can be wrapped around the histones more tightly when more of the lysine and arginine residues in the histone molecules remain deacetylated, i.e. positively charged. Thus, histone acetylation and deacetylation may alter the accessibility of certain DNA sections to transcriptionally active enzymes(309). Therefore, a high number of deacetylated histones – as observed after SPD treatment(133) – leads to modiﬁed expression of several genes(309). Recently it has been reported that SPD-treated yeast expressed Atg7, 11 and 15, which are involved in autophagy induction, at enhanced levels(8). Indeed, SPD failed to increase lifespan in atg-deﬁcient yeast(133). However, in D. melanogaster, recent data suggest a con- tribution of non-autophagic mechanisms to the improved response to oxidative stress upon SPD supplementation although these additional underlying signalling pathways have not been fully elucidated(310,311). SPD is still a very young topic in longevity research; therefore studies on potential negative side effects are rare. However, elevated concentrations of polyamines are thought to be related to an increased incidence of cancer. Possibly, oxidative damage, caused by oxidation of polyamines in general, con- tributes to this effect(303). Potential limitations in the use of SPD as an ERM result from observations that increased polyamine concentrations caused enhanced tumour progression(312–314). In fact, putative anti- cancer agents inhibit polyamine metabolism(303). However, in these studies polyamines were applied to model organisms with existing tumours or cells that had undergone oncogenic trans- formation(291). Up to now, there is no direct evidence for cancer-promoting effects of enhanced SPD intake in healthy animals. So far, however, there are no long-term studies in healthy mammals. Lipoic acid The disulﬁde derivative of octanoic acid is well known for its antioxidant activity that is also exerted by its reduced form dihydrolipoic acid(315). Apart from its antioxidant effect, lipoic acid (Fig. 8) is an essential cofactor for certain enzyme com- plexes, for example, pyruvate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglu- tarate dehydrogenase(316). Due to the beneﬁcial effects of antioxidants in general, it seems worth examining the healthspan- and lifespan-extending properties of lipoic acid. Lipoic acid exists as two stereoisomers, R-α-lipoic acid and S-α-lipoic acid. The biologically more active stereoisomer Nutrition Research Reviews S S O OH Fig. 8. Chemical structure of R-α-lipoic acid. H2N NH NH2 Fig. 7. Chemical structure of spermidine. 110 S. Nikolai et al. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press R-α-lipoic acid can be synthesised endogenously from fatty acids (octanoic acid) and a sulfur source (cysteine) or taken up with food(317). Exogenously supplied lipoic acid is mostly bound to lysine. As lipoyllysin it can be found in vegetables, for example, spinach, broccoli and tomatoes, as well as in animal tissues like liver, heart and kidney(12). According to some popular ageing theories, free radicals are probably a major reason for the development of ageing- associated diseases(10,248) Thus, enhancing the supply of exo- genous antioxidants might counteract the process of ageing and increase lifespan similar to ER. However, even though lipoic acid is a potent antioxidant, there are only a few studies showing increased lifespan in lipoic acid-supplemented invertebrates (C. elegans, D. melanogaster)(318–320). While experiments in rodents did not ﬁnd longevity-promoting effects under physiological conditions (in healthy animals with unrestricted food supply)(12,92,321) immunosuppressed mice receiving a lipoic acid-supplemented diet revealed longer life- spans than controls(322). Another experiment showed that mice that were re-fed ad libitum after being on ER lived longer when the ad libitum feed was supplemented with lipoic acid compared with non-supplemented ad libitum feed-receiving mice(12). Although evidence for lifespan-enhancing properties in rodents is missing, there are several publications pointing to the notion that lipoic acid counteracts age-related disorders. Lipoic acid was shown to reduce oxidative stress and damage in the heart muscle and brain in rats, thereby potentially ameliorating cardiac and neurodegenerative diseases(92,323–326). Apart from directly scavenging ROS and recycling of other antioxidants like vitamin C or glutathione(315), lipoic acid might also decrease oxidative damage to macromolecules by decreasing the amount of ROS that is produced within the mitochondrial electron chain(327). This protective effect may be mediated by enhancing the expression of UCP, which use the electrochemical gradient at the inner mitochondrial membrane to generate heat instead of ATP(328). Fatty acids are potent inductors of mito- chondrial UCP(329,330). It is assumed that lipoic acid might induce uncoupling due to its structural similarity to fatty acids(327). The controversial outcome of studies on lipoic acid regarding lifespan could be in part explained by the low stability of lipoic acid. Encapsulating lipoic acid in a cyclodextrin cavity increased its solubility(331) and stability(331,332). Interestingly only this complexed form of lipoic acid increased energy expenditure in old mice. Most probably this was mediated by the induction of UCP(333). Importantly, a positive correlation between the metabolic rate, mitochondrial uncoupling and the lifespan of mice was reported(334). However, clear evidence for a positive relationship between lipoic acid intake and lifespan in healthy mammals is still lacking. For a brief summary of the suggested molecular targets of the ERM candidates reviewed in this paper, see Fig. 9. Nutrition Research Reviews ROS ROS ROS LA LA LA RSV Oxidative stress RAP SPD RSV AMPK MET Glycolysis 2DG SIRT mTOR RAP SPD SPD Autophagy Proliferation RAP Inflammation RSV Mitochondrial function and turnover RSV Energy expenditure Fig. 9. Schematic overview of the suggested molecular targets of the energy restriction mimetic candidate substances 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG), metformin (MET), rapamycin (RAP), resveratrol (RSV), spermidine (SPD) and lipoic acid (LA). 2DG inhibits the central process of glycolysis, thereby favouring the activities of AMP- activated protein kinase (AMPK) and sirtuin (SIRT). MET increases AMPK activity, indirectly leading to increased autophagy and mitochondrial turnover. RAP inhibits mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling, thereby favouring autophagy and inhibiting proliferative processes. In addition to its antioxidant capacity, RSV is thought to increase SIRT and AMPK activity. SPD might up-regulate the antioxidant response, enhance autophagy and decrease proliferation. LA might improve mitochondrial function, increase energy expenditure and reduce oxidative stress. ROS, reactive oxygen species. Energy restriction and its mimetics 111 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press Conclusion Despite various beneﬁts of ER, such as a reduced risk for age-related chronic diseases, the limitations of ER need to be considered. In order to prevent adverse side effects like immunosuppression or loss of bone mineral density, ERM should only imitate the positive effects. However, until now no substances have been found that repeatedly mimic the positive effects seen in restrictively fed models without adverse effects for mammals. In order to possibly improve the health- promoting effects or reduce negative side effects of single substances, ERM candidates should be tested for putative synergistic interactions. Moreover, it needs to be ascertained if other components found in Mediterranean or Asian (‘Medi- terrAsian’(335)) diets might exert ER-like effects similar to RSV and SPD. There are only a few studies that have investigated ER effects in humans, since lifespan studies in human subjects are difﬁcult to perform (at the very least because of the length of human life). However, by means of measuring longevity bio- markers that have already been established in rodent or primate ER lifespan studies, putative healthspan- and lifespan- promoting effects in humans may be extrapolated. But due to the lack of feasibility of ER and the limitations of ERM candidate substances, alternative ER patterns should also be considered in future studies since there is strong evidence that moderate restriction regimens may improve healthspan(220–223). Thus, more research is needed in order to ﬁnd new dietary strategies that imitate positive ER effects without its downsides. Acknowledgements This research received no speciﬁc grant from any funding agency, commercial or not-for-proﬁt sectors. The authors contributed to the present review as follows: conception and design of the work (S. N., G. R., K. P. and P.H.); acquisition, analysis or interpretation of data (S. N. and K. P.); drafting of the manuscript (S. N. and K. P.); revising work cri- tically for important intellectual content (K. P., G. R. and P.H.); and approval of the ﬁnal version (S. N., K. P., P. H. and G. R.). There are no conﬂicts of interest. References 1. World Heath Organization (2005) Preventing chronic diseases: a vital investment. http://www.who.int/chp/chronic_ disease_report/full_report.pdf (accessed November 2014). 2. Berghofer A, Pischon T, Reinhold T, et al. (2008) Obesity prevalence from a European perspective: a systematic review. BMC Public Health 8, 200. 3. Stevens GA, Singh GM, Lu Y, et al. (2012) National, regional, and global trends in adult overweight and obesity pre- valences. Popul Health Metr 10, 22. 4. Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, et al. (2009) Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epide- miology and Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart Federa- tion; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International Association for the Study of Obesity. Circulation 120, 1640–1645. 5. Krauss RM, Deckelbaum RJ, Ernst N, et al. (1996) Dietary guidelines for healthy American adults. A statement for health professionals from the Nutrition Committee, American Heart Association. Circulation 94, 1795–1800. 6. Martin-Montalvo A, Mercken EM, Mitchell SJ, et al. (2013) Metformin improves healthspan and lifespan in mice. Nat Commun 4, 2192. 7. Ford ES, Giles WH & Dietz WH (2002) Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome among US adults: ﬁndings from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. JAMA 287, 356–359. 8. Morselli E, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, et al. (2009) Autophagy mediates pharmacological lifespan extension by spermidine and resveratrol. Aging 1, 961–970. 9. Toth MJ & Tchernof A (2000) Lipid metabolism in the elderly. Eur J Clin Nutr 54, Suppl. 3, S121–S125. 10. Kim HJ, Jung KJ, Yu BP, et al. (2002) Modulation of redox- sensitive transcription factors by calorie restriction during aging. Mech Ageing Dev 123, 1589–1595. 11. Rae MJ, Butler RN, Campisi J, et al. (2010) The demographic and biomedical case for late-life interventions in aging. Sci Transl Med 2, 40cm21. 12. Merry BJ, Kirk AJ & Goyns MH (2008) Dietary lipoic acid supplementation can mimic or block the effect of dietary restriction on life span. Mech Ageing Dev 129, 341–348. 13. Minor RK, Smith DL Jr, Sossong AM, et al. (2010) Chronic ingestion of 2-deoxy-d-glucose induces cardiac vacuoliza- tion and increases mortality in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 243, 332–339. 14. Yu BP (1994) How diet inﬂuences the aging process of the rat. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 205, 97–105. 15. Weindruch R (1996) The retardation of aging by caloric restriction: studies in rodents and primates. Toxicol Pathol 24, 742–745. 16. McCay CM, Crowell MF & Maynard LA (1989) The effect of retarded growth upon the length of life span and upon the ultimate body size. 1935. Nutrition 5, 155–171; discussion 172. 17. Wu Z, Liu SQ & Huang D (2013) Dietary restriction depends on nutrient composition to extend chronological lifespan in budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLOS ONE 8, e64448. 18. Lakowski B & Hekimi S (1998) The genetics of caloric restriction in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95, 13091–13096. 19. Min KJ, Yamamoto R, Buch S, et al. (2008) Drosophila life- span control by dietary restriction independent of insulin- like signaling. Aging Cell 7, 199–206. 20. Weindruch R, Walford RL, Fligiel S, et al. (1986) The retar- dation of aging in mice by dietary restriction: longevity, cancer, immunity and lifetime energy intake. J Nutr 116, 641–654. 21. McShane TM & Wise PM (1996) Life-long moderate caloric restriction prolongs reproductive life span in rats without interrupting estrous cyclicity: effects on the gonadotropin- releasing hormone/luteinizing hormone axis. Biol Reprod 54, 70–75. 22. Colman RJ, Anderson RM, Johnson SC, et al. (2009) Caloric restriction delays disease onset and mortality in rhesus monkeys. Science 325, 201–204. 23. McCay CM, Crowell MF & Maynard LA (1935) The effect of retarded growth upon the length of life span and upon the ultimate body size. J Nutr 10, 63–79. 24. Swindell WR (2012) Dietary restriction in rats and mice: a meta-analysis and review of the evidence for genotype- dependent effects on lifespan. Ageing Res Rev 11, 254–270. Nutrition Research Reviews 112 S. Nikolai et al. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press 25. Sohal RS & Forster MJ (2014) Caloric restriction and the aging process: a critique. Free Radic Biol Med 73, 366–382. 26. Mattison JA, Roth GS, Beasley TM, et al. (2012) Impact of caloric restriction on health and survival in rhesus monkeys from the NIA study. Nature 489, 318–321. 27. Walford RL, Harris SB & Gunion MW (1992) The calorically restricted low-fat nutrient-dense diet in Biosphere 2 signiﬁcantly lowers blood glucose, total leukocyte count, cholesterol, and blood pressure in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89, 11533–11537. 28. Walford RL, Mock D, Verdery R, et al. (2002) Calorie restriction in biosphere 2, alterations in physiologic, hema- tologic, hormonal, and biochemical parameters in humans restricted for a 2-year period. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 57, B211–B224. 29. Walford RL, Weber L & Panov S (1995) Caloric restriction and aging as viewed from Biosphere 2. Receptor 5, 29–33. 30. Willcox BJ, Willcox DC, He Q, et al. (2006) Siblings of Okinawan centenarians share lifelong mortality advantages. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 61, 345–354. 31. Willcox DC, Willcox BJ, Todoriki H, et al. (2009) The Okinawan diet: health implications of a low-calorie, nutrient- dense, antioxidant-rich dietary pattern low in glycemic load. J Am Coll Nutr 28, Suppl, 500S–516S. 32. Lane MA, Mattison J, Ingram DK, et al. (2002) Caloric restriction and aging in primates: relevance to humans and possible CR mimetics. Microsc Res Tech 59, 335–338. 33. Duffy PH, Feuers RJ, Leakey JA, et al. (1989) Effect of chronic caloric restriction on physiological variables related to energy metabolism in the male Fischer 344 rat. Mech Ageing Dev 48, 117–133. 34. Mattison JA, Lane MA, Roth GS, et al. (2003) Calorie restriction in rhesus monkeys. Exp Gerontol 38, 35–46. 35. Chen D, Steele AD, Lindquist S, et al. (2005) Increase in activity during calorie restriction requires Sirt1. Science 310, 1641. 36. Speakman JR & Mitchell SE (2011) Caloric restriction. Mol Aspects Med 32, 159–221. 37. Hwangbo DS, Gershman B, Tu MP, et al. (2004) Drosophila dFOXO controls lifespan and regulates insulin signalling in brain and fat body. Nature 429, 562–566. 38. Pires RC, Souza EE, Vanzela EC, et al. (2014) Short-term calorie restriction improves glucose homeostasis in old rats: involvement of AMPK. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 39, 895–901. 39. Zhu M, Miura J, Lu LX, et al. (2004) Circulating adiponectin levels increase in rats on caloric restriction: the potential for insulin sensitization. Exp Gerontol 39, 1049–1059. 40. Weindruch R, Keenan KP, Carney JM, et al. (2001) Caloric restriction mimetics: metabolic interventions. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 56, Spec no. 1, 20–33. 41. Lim EL, Hollingsworth KG, Aribisala BS, et al. (2011) Reversal of type 2 diabetes: normalisation of beta cell function in association with decreased pancreas and liver triacylglycerol. Diabetologia 54, 2506–2514. 42. Takatsu M, Nakashima C, Takahashi K, et al. (2013) Calorie restriction attenuates cardiac remodeling and diastolic dys- function in a rat model of metabolic syndrome. Hypertension 62, 957–965. 43. Lezcano EJ, Inigo P, Larraga AM, et al. (2014) Caloric restriction or telmisartan control dyslipidemia and nephro- pathy in obese diabetic Zucker rats. Diabetol Metab Syndr 6, 10. 44. Hagopian K, Ramsey JJ & Weindruch R (2003) Caloric restriction increases gluconeogenic and transaminase enzyme activities in mouse liver. Exp Gerontol 38, 267–278. 45. Feuers RJ, Duffy PH, Leakey JA, et al. (1989) Effect of chronic caloric restriction on hepatic enzymes of inter- mediary metabolism in the male Fischer 344 rat. Mech Ageing Dev 48, 179–189. 46. Hipkiss AR (2007) Dietary restriction, glycolysis, hormesis and ageing. Biogerontology 8, 221–224. 47. Anisimov VN, Berstein LM, Egormin PA, et al. (2005) Effect of metformin on life span and on the development of spontaneous mammary tumors in HER-2/neu transgenic mice. Exp Gerontol 40, 685–693. 48. Guo Z, Mitchell-Raymundo F, Yang H, et al. (2002) Dietary restriction reduces atherosclerosis and oxidative stress in the aorta of apolipoprotein E-deﬁcient mice. Mech Ageing Dev 123, 1121–1131. 49. Yang F, Chu X, Yin M, et al. (2014) mTOR and autophagy in normal brain aging and caloric restriction ameliorating age- related cognition deﬁcits. Behav Brain Res 264, 82–90. 50. Weindruch R & Walford RL (1982) Dietary restriction in mice beginning at 1 year of age: effect on life-span and sponta- neous cancer incidence. Science 215, 1415–1418. 51. Hursting SD, Lavigne JA, Berrigan D, et al. (2003) Calorie restriction, aging, and cancer prevention: mechanisms of action and applicability to humans. Annu Rev Med 54, 131–152. 52. Sabatino F, Masoro EJ, McMahan CA, et al. (1991) Assess- ment of the role of the glucocorticoid system in aging pro- cesses and in the action of food restriction. J Gerontol 46, B171–B179. 53. Redman LM & Ravussin E (2009) Endocrine alterations in response to calorie restriction in humans. Mol Cell Endocrinol 299, 129–136. 54. Cangemi R, Friedmann AJ, Holloszy JO, et al. (2010) Long- term effects of calorie restriction on serum sex-hormone concentrations in men. Aging Cell 9, 236–242. 55. Redman LM, Martin CK, Williamson DA, et al. (2008) Effect of caloric restriction in non-obese humans on physiological, psychological and behavioral outcomes. Physiol Behav 94, 643–648. 56. Smiarowska M, Safranow K, Dziedziejko V, et al. (2014) Association of plasma hormones, nutritional status, and stressful life events in anorexia nervosa patients. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online) 68, 162–171. 57. Sohal RS & Weindruch R (1996) Oxidative stress, caloric restriction, and aging. Science 273, 59–63. 58. Roth GS, Handy AM, Mattison JA, et al. (2002) Effects of dietary caloric restriction and aging on thyroid hormones of rhesus monkeys. Horm Metab Res 34, 378–382. 59. Fontana L, Klein S, Holloszy JO, et al. (2006) Effect of long- term calorie restriction with adequate protein and micro- nutrients on thyroid hormones. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91, 3232–3235. 60. Heilbronn LK, de Jonge L, Frisard MI, et al. (2006) Effect of 6-month calorie restriction on biomarkers of longevity, metabolic adaptation, and oxidative stress in overweight individuals: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 295, 1539–1548. 61. Wikstrom L, Johansson C, Salto C, et al. (1998) Abnormal heart rate and body temperature in mice lacking thyroid hormone receptor α1. EMBO J 17, 455–461. 62. Brown-Borg HM, Borg KE, Meliska CJ, et al. (1996) Dwarf mice and the ageing process. Nature 384, 33. 63. Cadenas S, Buckingham JA, Samec S, et al. (1999) UCP2 and UCP3 rise in starved rat skeletal muscle but mitochondrial proton conductance is unchanged. FEBS Lett 462, 257–260. 64. Samec S, Seydoux J & Dulloo AG (1998) Role of UCP homo- logues in skeletal muscles and brown adipose tissue: mediators Nutrition Research Reviews Energy restriction and its mimetics 113 https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954422415000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press of thermogenesis or regulators of lipids as fuel substrate? FASEB J 12, 715–724. 65. Duval C, Negre-Salvayre A, Dogilo A, et al. (2002) Increased reactive oxygen species production with antisense oligonu- cleotides directed against uncoupling protein 2 in murine endothelial cells. Biochem Cell Biol 80, 757–764. 66. Fontana L (2009) Neuroendocrine factors in the regulation of inﬂammation: excessive adiposity and calorie restriction. Exp Gerontol 44, 41–45. 67. Mattson MP (2008) Hormesis deﬁned. Ageing Res Rev 7, 1–7. 68. Masoro EJ (2007) The role of hormesis in life extension by dietary restriction. Interdiscip Top Gerontol 35, 1–17. 69. Ristow M & Zarse K (2010) How increased oxidative stress promotes longevity and metabolic health: the concept of mitochondrial hormesis (mitohormesis). Exp Gerontol 45, 410–418. 70. Sharma S & Kaur G (2007) Intermittent dietary restriction as a practical intervention in aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1114, 419–427. 71. Castello L, Froio T, Cavallini G, et al. (2005) Calorie restric- tion protects against age-related rat aorta sclerosis. FASEB J 19, 1863–1865. 72