Biochemical Genetic Pathways that Modulate Aging in Multiple Species Alessandro Bitto, Adrienne M. Wang, Christopher F. Bennett, and Matt Kaeberlein Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195 Correspondence: kaeber@uw.edu The mechanisms underlying biological aging have been extensively studied in the past 20 years with the avail of mainly four model organisms: the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the fruitﬂy Drosophila melanogaster, and the domestic mouse Mus musculus. Extensive research in these four model organisms has identiﬁed a few conserved genetic pathways that affect longevity as well as metabolism and development. Here, we review how the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), sirtuins, adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), and mitochondrial stress-signaling pathways inﬂuence aging and life span in the aforementioned models and their possible implications for delaying aging in humans. We also draw some connections between these biochemical pathways and comment on what new developments aging research will likely bring in the near future. T he science of aging has rapidly advanced in the past two decades owing to the use of evolutionarily divergent model organisms in ex- perimental studies. The most common of these include the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevi- siae, the nematode worm Caenorhabditis ele- gans, the fruit ﬂy Drosophila melanogaster, the domestic mouse Mus musculus, and, to a lesser extent, the rat Rattus norvegicus. Studies of aging in nonhuman primates, such as rhesus monkeys and marmosets, have also had a large impact on the ﬁeld in the last few years. Additionally, re- cent comparative biological approachesto aging have adopted less commonly used model organ- isms that feature exceptional longevity, such as the naked mole rat, short-lived ﬁsh, certain spe- cies of clams, or those with potent regenerative potential, such as hydra (Austad 2009; Valen- zano et al. 2009; Ridgway et al. 2011; Petralia et al. 2014). Historically, a majorquestion in the ﬁeld has been the degree to which studies of aging in nonhuman organisms will be informative about the mechanisms of human aging and the pro- cesses that contribute to age-related disease (Gershon and Gershon 2000; Warner 2003). Al- though it is still not possible to deﬁnitively an- swer this question, a large body of data exists supporting the ideathat at least some basic prin- ciples of aging are broadly conserved, even in single-celled eukaryotes, such as budding yeast. In particular, several genetic and environmental factors that modulate longevity in two or more commonly used model organisms have been identiﬁed (Sutphin and Kaeberlein 2011). Ma- nipulation of these conserved modiﬁers of lon- Editors: S. Jay Olshansky, George M. Martin, and James L. Kirkland Additional Perspectives on Aging available at www.perspectivesinmedicine.org Copyright # 2015 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved; doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a025114 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 1 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from gevity is sufﬁcient to increase life span in evolu- tionarily divergent species, showing that they are likely to modulate the aging process itself. This, in turn, suggeststhat there are at least some fundamental aspects of aging that are shared between yeast, worms, ﬂies, and mice. Given that the evolutionary distance between these species is much greater than the distance be- tween mice and humans, it seems likely that at least a subset of the principles of aging gleaned from these model systems will also be applicable to people (Kaeberlein 2013). A general principle of conserved modiﬁers of longevity is that they tend to regulate the relationship between growth and environmen- tal cues, particularly nutrient status. The best studied of these is dietary restriction (DR), also referred to as caloric restriction or calorie restriction, which can be deﬁned as a reduction in nutrient availability in the absence of malnu- trition. DR has been shown to extend life span and improve health during aging in numerous species (Weindruch and Walford 1988). This may reﬂect a fundamental principle that rates of aging are linked to developmental pathways modulating growth and reproductive trajecto- ries in response to variable environmental situ- ations. For the remainder of this article, we will describe these conserved longevity pathways, their genetic and biochemical properties, and mechanisms by which they may act to modulate rates of aging and risk for age-related disease. THE FOUR MOST COMMON MODEL ORGANISMS USED IN AGING RESEARCH As mentioned above, the four major nonhuman model organisms used in aging-related research are budding yeast, nematode worms, fruit ﬂies, and laboratory mice. Each of these species has its own strengths and weaknesses as a model for human aging, and it is important to consider the ways in which they are similar but also how they differ with respect to physiology, longevity, and aging traits. Notably, the shape of the sur- vival curves in these organisms is superﬁcially similar to each other and to human survival data as modeled by Gompertz–Makeham ki- netics (Kaeberlein et al. 2001), although such similarity does not imply any conservation of aging mechanisms. Yeast Aging was ﬁrst deﬁned in budding yeast by Rob- ert Mortimer and John Johnston more than 60 years ago, when it was discovered that yeast mother cells undergo a limited number of mi- totic cell divisions before reaching a terminal replicative arrest (Mortimer and Johnston 1959). This form of aging in yeast has since been extensively studied and is referred to as replicative aging, with the corresponding lon- gevity metric deﬁned as replicative life span (RLS) (Steinkraus et al. 2008; Steffen et al. 2009; Kaeberlein 2010). A key feature of repli- cative aging in yeast is asymmetric division; mother cells retain and accumulate molecular damage during mitotic division, whereas daughter cells are generally spared from inherit- ing such damage and are born with a full RLS potential even when produced by aged mothers (Egilmez and Jazwinski 1989; Kennedy et al. 1994). There is good evidence for asymmetric inheritance of at least three different types of damage during yeast replicative aging: nuclear extrachromosomalribosomalDNA(rDNA)cir- cles (Sinclair and Guarente 1997; Defossez et al. 1998, 1999), oxidatively damaged or misfolded cytoplasmic proteins (Aguilaniu et al. 2003; Er- javec and Nystrom 2007; Erjavecet al. 2007), and dysfunctional mitochondria (Lai et al. 2002). A second form of yeast aging has also been described, referred to as chronological aging. In contrast to replicative aging, chronological ag- ing of yeast cells is accomplished by preventing mitotic cell division and maintaining cells in a nondividing state (Fabrizio and Longo 2007; Longo et al. 2012). The corresponding longevity metric, chronological life span (CLS), is deﬁned as the length of time a yeast cell can survive in a nondividing state, with survival determined by the ability to reenter the cell cycle and resume vegetative growth on exposure to appropriate growth-promoting cues. Several different meth- ods have been described for performing chro- nological aging experiments (Piper et al. 2006; A. Bitto et al. 2 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from Murakami et al. 2008; Murakami and Kaeber- lein 2009; Longo and Fabrizio 2012). Similar to replicative aging, there is evidence for accumu- lation of oxidatively damaged proteins and mi- tochondrial dysfunction during chronological aging. The relationship between chronological and replicative aging and the relevance of these two distinct types of aging in yeast to aging in mul- ticellular eukaryotes remains an area of active study. Large-scale studies have detected signiﬁ- cant overlap between genetic control of longev- ity in C. elegans with genetic control of RLS (Smith et al. 2008a), but not CLS (Burtner et al. 2011). This could be related to the fact that acidiﬁcation of the culture medium limits CLS under the most commonly used conditions for chronological aging experiments (Burtner et al. 2009; Murakami et al. 2011), which is not the case for RLS (Wasko et al. 2013). Nonetheless, key regulators of CLS also modulate RLS as well as aging in worms, ﬂies, and mice (described further below). In addition, chronologically aged cells also show a reduction in subsequent RLS, suggesting that similar forms of age-asso- ciated damage may contribute to both mitotic (RLS) and postmitotic (CLS) aging in yeast cells (Ashraﬁet al. 1999; Murakami et al. 2012; De- laney et al. 2013). Worms The nematode worm C. elegans is a facultative hermaphrodite that hatches from an egg and undergoes four larval stages (L1–L4) before reaching reproductive adulthood. Once adult- hood has been reached, a typical hermaphro- dite maintained at the standard temperature of 20˚C will lay about 200 eggs over a period of 3–5 days before depletion of sperm, followed by an extended postreproductive period of 2–3 wk. With the exception of the germ line, adult C. elegans are thought to be completely post- mitotic. Life span in worms is typically deﬁned as the length of time from hatching until death, which is determined manually by the absence of move- ment on gentle prodding. There are several fea- tures to consider when designing C. elegans life span studies, including the temperature (gener- ally 15˚C–25˚C), the amount, strain, and met- abolic state of bacterial food to provide, and whether to use the drug 5-ﬂuorodeoxyuridine (FUDR) to prevent hatching of progeny (Sut- phin and Kaeberlein 2009). Nearly all studies of aging in C. elegans use the standard wild-type N2 control strain. Depending on the conditions chosen, N2 life span can range from about 15 days (25˚C, live food) to 35 days (15˚C, growth- arrested food) (Leiseret al. 2011). In addition to life span, C. elegans affords the ability to mon- itor age-associated measures of health span, such as maintenance of muscle function, tis- sue atrophy, and accumulation of autoﬂuores- cent pigment (Herndon et al. 2002; Huang et al. 2004). As in yeast, there is good evidence that maintenance of protein homeostasis and mitochondrial function play a central role in C. elegans aging. Flies The fruit ﬂy D. melanogaster was the ﬁrst inver- tebrate organisms to be widely used in aging research, with life-span studies dating back to 1916 (Loeb and Northrop 1916). The ﬂy life cycle consists of three easily distinguishable growth stages (embryo, larva, and pupae) oc- curring over a span of 10 days at 25˚C, followed by reproductive adulthood. Flies are typically maintained in the laboratory in vials with an agar-based cornmeal–sugar–yeast or sugar– yeast food source. Unlike yeast and worms, methods for creating long-term frozen stocks are not available in Drosophila, but stock centers into which researchers deposit published strains as well as large centers that maintain libraries of transgenic, RNAi, and mutant ﬂy lines are a valuable tool to ﬂy researchers. Life-span studies in Drosophila measure the length of time between eclosion (emergence of an adult ﬂy from its pupal case) and death, with a median life span of wild-type strains averaging ≏2–3 mowhen maintained at 25˚C. Because of genetic drift often found in individual labora- tory strains and the differences in food compo- sition between laboratories, genetic background and food type need to be tightly controlled in ﬂy Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 3 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from life-span and behavioral studies (Tatar et al. 2014). The adult ﬂy shows many structures ho- mologous to mammalian organs, such as heart, lung, kidney, gut, and reproductive tract. Im- portantly, Drosophila have a relatively simple nervous system that contains the same basic neural circuitry as mammals, modulating com- plex behavior and allowing for measures of health span and cognitive function often seen in human aging and neurodegenerative disease. As seen in yeast and worms, strong evidence exists linking protein homeostasis and mito- chondrial function to organismal aging and life span (Cho et al. 2011; Rera et al. 2011; Bai et al. 2013). Mice The laboratory mouse M. musculus has become the premier mammalian model organism for aging research, in large part owing to the avail- ability of several well-characterized inbred strains and the relatively early development of methods for knocking out and transgenically expressing different genes. Although several dif- ferent inbred strains have been commonly used for aging-related studies, C57BL/6 has become the strain of choice for most mouse aging and longevity studies. Median life span can vary greatly among strains, and there is wide varia- tion in reported life span even for C57BL/6, with median life spans ranging from ≏800 to .920 days (Coschigano et al. 2003; Perez et al. 2009). For many years, the National Institute on Aging has provided aged C57BL/6 mice to the research community, which has spurred numer- ous studies of aging-related traits in this back- ground. In recent years, the importance of quantifying health span measures in addition to life span has become more widely recognized, and mice provide an opportunity to query nu- merous age-dependent measures of health that are shared with humans but not invertebrate species. The limitations of working in a single inbred strain background have also become bet- ter recognized, and the use of genetically het- erogeneous mice for aging studies, such as the UM-HET3 four-way cross background, is be- coming more common. CONSERVED LONGEVITY PATHWAYS Studies from model organisms have identiﬁed several orthologous genes that similarly modu- late longevity across broad evolutionary dis- tance (Kaeberlein 2007; Sutphin and Kaeberlein 2011). In some cases, the mechanisms by which the corresponding proteins affect aging are poorly understood, although in many cases they can be ascribed to one or more “conserved longevity pathways.” The remainder of this re- view will discuss the best characterized of these pathways and the growing evidence for complex interrelationships among them. Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) mTOR is a serine/threonine protein kinase of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase-related family that is highly conserved among eukaryotes (Keith and Schreiber 1995; Stanfel et al. 2009). mTOR activity generally promotes cellular growth and cell division in response to nutrient and growth factor cues through a complicated network of interactions (Laplante and Sabatini 2012; Shimobayashi and Hall 2014; Johnson et al. 2015). The mTOR protein acts in at least two complexes, mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2), each of which has distinct components, upstream regu- lators, and downstream substrates (Weber and Gutmann 2012; Takahara and Maeda 2013; Huang and Fingar 2014). The mTORC1 com- plex has been characterized extensively and functions as a central regulator of longevity. mTORC1 is known to promote global messen- ger RNA (mRNA) translation, repress autoph- agy, and modulate mitochondrial metabolism, with each of these downstream functions impli- cated in its role in aging (Johnson et al. 2015). The mTORC2 complex, in contrast, is less well characterized. Evidence from D. melanogaster, Dictyostelium discoideum, and human cells sug- gest that mTORC2 responds to insulin and Ras signaling (Lee et al. 2005; Sarbassov et al. 2005; Charestetal.2010),butitsprecisemechanismof activation remains elusive. mTORC2 regulates the activity of several substrates involved in cy- toskeleton reorganization and cell polarity, but A. Bitto et al. 4 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from also in cell growth and metabolism (Loewith et al. 2002; Sarbassov et al. 2004, 2005; Garcı´a- Martı´nez and Alessi 2008; Ikenoue et al. 2008). The ﬁrst evidence that reduced mTORC1 signaling is sufﬁcient to increase life span came from studies in yeast, in which mutation of the S6 kinase homolog Sch9 was shown to extend chronological life span (Fabrizio et al. 2001); although, at the time, the link between Sch9 and mTORC1 was not appreciated. A few years later, genetic inhibition of mTOR itself, as well as other components of the mTORC1 com- plex, was found to extend life span in worms (Vellai et al. 2003; Jia et al. 2004), ﬂies (Kapahi et al. 2004), and, soon thereafter, replicative life span in yeast (Kaeberlein et al. 2005a). The importanceof mTORC1 in mammalian aging was ﬁrst documented in studies per- formed by the National Institute on Aging’s In- terventions Testing Program (ITP). The ITP is a program designed to test the effect of interven- tions solicited from the scientiﬁc communityon life span in the genetically heterogeneous mouse strainUM-HET3background(Milleretal.2007; Nadon et al. 2008). In 2009, the ITP reported that treating mice with the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin beginning at 600 days of age was suf- ﬁcient to increase median and maximum life span in both male and female UM-HET3 mice (Harrisonetal.2009).Aswithgeneticinhibition ofmTOR,pharmacologicalinhibition ofmTOR with rapamycin has also been found to increase life span in yeast (Powers et al. 2006; Medvedik et al. 2007), worms (Robida-Stubbs et al. 2012), and ﬂies (Bjedov et al. 2010). Since publication of the initial study show- ing life-span extension from rapamycin in UM- HET3 mice, the ITP has also reported life-span extension following rapamycin treatment initi- ated at 9 mo of age (Miller et al. 2011), as well as a partial dose–response trial testing three dif- ferent doses of the drug, with the highest dose yielding the most robust increase in life span (Miller et al. 2014). Other groups have also re- ported life-span extension from rapamycin treatment in the C57BL/6 and 129/Sv mouse strain backgrounds (Anisimov et al. 2011; Neff et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2014). In addition to extending life span, rapamycin also appears to improve numerous age-related health span pa- rameters, including cancer risk, cardiac func- tion, cognitive function, and immune function (Chen et al. 2009; Halloran et al. 2012; Ma- jumder et al. 2012; Wilkinson et al. 2012; Flynn et al. 2013; Neff et al. 2013; Dai et al. 2014). In addition to rapamycin treatment, several genetic models of reduced mTORC1 signaling have improved health span and enhanced lon- gevity in mice. Knockout of the S6k1 gene en- coding S6 kinase increases life span in female mice (Selman et al. 2009) and confers enhanced resistance to diet-induced obesity (Um et al. 2004). Mice heterozygous for both mTOR and mLST8, two components of the mTORC1 com- plex, are also long-lived (Lamming et al. 2012), as are mice expressing hypomorphic alleles of mTOR, which also show preservation of func- tion in many organ systems during aging (Wu et al. 2013). The complexityof mTOR signaling presents a challenge in untangling the mechanistic basis for thepositiveeffectsofmTORC1inhibitionon life span and health span. At a molecular level, thereisaccumulatingevidencethatinhibitionof mTORC1 increases life span through a combi- nation of differential translation of target mRNAs (for more details, see Zid et al. 2009; Carson et al. 2012), induction of autophagy, and altered mitochondrial metabolism (Fig. 1) (Kaeberlein 2013; Johnson et al. 2015). It re- mains unclear which of these mechanisms is moreimportantforlife-spanextensionorwhich tissues and cell types are most critical for medi- atingtheireffects onlongevity.Inmice,ageneral reduction in inﬂammation and reduced cancer incidence are also important effects of mTOR inhibition, which contribute to improved lon- gevity and health span. Regardless of the mech- anisms of action, the large number of studies documenting life-span extension and improved health span from mTORC1 inhibition provide some expectation that this pathway similarly modulates human aging (discussed below). Sirtuins Sirtuins are a family of nicotinamide ade- nine dinucleotide (NADþ)-dependent enzymes Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 5 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from that catalyze posttranslational modiﬁcation of proteins—primarily deacetylation (Imai et al. 2000; Landry et al. 2000; Smith et al. 2000), but also adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosy- lation (Haigis et al. 2006). In some cases, re- moval of succinyl, malonyl, glutaryl, and per- haps other moieties from lysine residues can also be catalyzed by sirtuins (Nakagawa et al. 2009; Du et al. 2011; Peng et al. 2011; Park et al. 2013; Rardin et al. 2013; Tan et al. 2014). The key biochemical feature that distinguishes sirtuins from other protein deacetylases is their absolute requirement for NADþ, which gets consumedduringthesereactions.Theterm“sir- tuin” is derived from the budding yeast Sir2 pro- tein, whichwasthe ﬁrst memberof this familyof enzymestobeextensivelycharacterized, andwas initially identiﬁed as a factor required for tran- scriptional silencing at the heterothallic (HM)- mating loci and subsequently at subtelomeric regions and ribosomal DNA in S. cerevisiae (Klar et al. 1979; Ivy et al. 1986; Rine and Her- skowitz 1987; Aparicio et al. 1991; Fritze et al. 1997; Smith and Boeke 1997). Yeast and ﬂies IRS-1 IGF-1 Amino acids Ghrelin Insulin IGF-1 GH GHRH Pituitary gland Hypothalamus Nutrients PI3K p66 PDK-1 Muscle growth Bone growth Neuroprotection Stem-cell niche AKT TSC1/2 TORC2 ? Rheb FoxO Apoptosis 4E-BP S6K1 SREBP YY-1 TORC1 Autophagy Cell homeostasis Cell homeostasis Cell growth Cell growth Liver Figure 1. The growth hormone (GH)/insulin-like growth-factor (IGF)-1-signaling axis and its intracellular mediators. GH released from the pituitary gland stimulates IGF-1 production from the liver (systemic IGF-1) and peripheral tissues (local IGF-1). IGF-1 signals to several conserved players in aging research through the IGF-1 receptor, such as the transcription factor FoxO and the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) kinase complex. These factors regulate cellular growth and homeostasis pathways, which can have a profound effect on longevity and aging phenotypes. GHRH, Growth-hormone-releasing hormone; IRS, insulin receptor substrate; PDK-1, phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1; BP, binding protein; SREBP, sterol receptor element-binding protein. A. Bitto et al. 6 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from have ﬁve sirtuin proteins, C. elegans has four, and both mice and humans have seven sirtuins (SIRT1-7) (Frye 2000; Giblin et al. 2014). The importance of sirtuins in aging was ﬁrst deﬁned in budding yeast, in which overexpres- sion of Sir2 was shown to increase the RLS of mother cells (Kaeberlein et al. 1999). The pri- mary mechanism by which Sir2 promotes rep- licative longevity in yeast appears to involve in- creased genomic stability within the rDNA (Gottlieb and Esposito 1989; Kaeberlein et al. 1999), which is composed of dozens of 9.1-kb DNA sequences arrayed in tandem (Petes and Botstein 1977; Philippsen et al. 1978). In addi- tion to enhancing rDNA stability, yeast Sir2 has also been suggested to promote asymmetric re- tention of damaged proteins within the mother cell, which may also contribute to its prolongev- ity role (Aguilaniu et al. 2003). Following the initial report that Sir2 over- expression extends life span in yeast, subsequent studies in both C. elegans and D. melanogaster reported a similar life-span extension from overexpression of the Sir2 orthologs in those organisms, sir-2.1 and dSir2, respectively (Tis- senbaum and Guarente 2001; Rogina and Hel- fand 2004). Thus far, no deﬁnitive mechanism of action has emerged for how worm and ﬂy sirtuins enhance longevity, and there has been ample controversy over both of the initial re- ports (Burnett et al. 2011; Viswanathan and Guarente 2011). Although a comprehensive re- view of the literature on this topic is beyond the scope of this work, the emerging consensus ap- pears to be that the importance of Sir2 ortho- logs in worm and ﬂy aging is more modest than initially suggested, is likely dependent on spe- ciﬁc experimental conditions and genetic back- ground, and that the effects on life span from overexpression may be exquisitely sensitive to dosage (Lombard et al. 2011). As mentioned above, there are seven mam- malian sirtuins with distinct tissue and subcel- lular distributions, as well as differing biochem- ical activities (Finkel et al 2009; Satoh et al. 2011; Giblin et al. 2014). SIRT1 is the mammalian ortholog of yeast Sir2 and has been implicated (both as a protective and as risk factor) in awide array of age-associated disorders, including heart failure and cardiovascular disease (Hsu et al. 2008; Luo et al. 2014), different forms of cancer (Firestein et al. 2008; Lim et al. 2010; Srisuttee et al. 2012; Yuan et al. 2013), metabolic syndrome (Li 2013; Chang and Guarente 2014), and various neurodegenerative diseases (Her- skovits and Guarente 2014). Whole-body over- expression of SIRT1 does not appear to extend life span in mice, even though it improves some metabolic parameters that may be associated with health span (Bordone et al. 2007). Several different promoters, including a variety of tis- sue- and cell-type-speciﬁc drivers, have also failed to show increased life span from SIRT1 overexpression in mice, although in some cases improved health measures were detected, sim- ilar to whole body overexpression (Alcendor et al. 2007; Herranz et al. 2010; Jeong et al. 2012). Recently, a mouse overexpressing SIRT1 specif- ically in the hypothalamus (BRASTO mice— brain-speciﬁc SIRT1 overexpressing) was re- ported to be both long-lived and have improved health span, suggesting that SIRT1 activity in the brain may be particularly important for healthy aging in mice (Satoh et al. 2013). Although SIRT1 has been studied most ex- tensively, there is a growing body of literature suggesting that the other sirtuin family mem- bers, SIRT2-7, may also modulate healthy aging in mammals. SIRT6, in particular, seems to be important for mouse longevity, as Sirt62/2 mice show phenotypes consistent with acceler- ated aging in some tissues (Mostoslavsky et al. 2006), and male but not female mice overex- pressing SIRT6 have extended life span (Kanﬁ et al. 2012). Life-span extension has thus far not been reported for other sirtuins in wild-type mice; however, overexpression of SIRT2 in short-lived BUBR1 hypomorphic mice can im- prove cardiac function and partially suppress the life-span defect of male animals (North et al. 2014). SIRT3 is a mitochondrial sirtuin that has also been reported to inﬂuence age-related metabolic dysfunction and to promote im- proved mitochondrial function in a variety of contexts, including during DR (Shi et al. 2005; Nakagawa et al. 2009; Palacios et al. 2009; Schwer et al. 2009; Hirschey et al. 2010; Someya et al. 2010; Hallows et al. 2011). Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 7 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from A large body of work links pharmacologi- cal activation of sirtuins with improved meta- bolic and health span parameters. The ﬁrst so- called sirtuin-activating compound (STAC) to be studied was resveratrol, which was reported to increase replicative life span in yeast (Howitz et al.2003). Resveratrolhasalso been reported to increase life span inworms and ﬂies (Wood et al. 2004) and to increase survival in short-lived mice fed a high-fat diet (Baur et al. 2006). This work has been clouded, however, by reports that resveratrol does not directly activate Sir2 or SIRT1 (Borra et al. 2005; Kaeberlein et al. 2005b), and by studies that have failed to repro- duce the reported life span extension from res- veratrol in yeast (Kaeberlein et al. 2005b), worms, or ﬂies (Bass et al. 2007). The ITP has also reported that resveratrol has no effect on life span or health span of UM-HET3 mice fed a normaldiet (Milleretal.2011).Additionalstud- ies using second-generation STACs have pro- vided further evidence that pharmacological activation of sirtuins may improve some mea- sures of health span during aging in mice, particularly metabolic deﬁcits associated with normative aging or diet-induced obesity, al- though with only modest increase in life span (Minor et al. 2011; Mercken et al. 2014; Mitchell et al. 2014). Adenosine Monophosphate-Activated Kinase The 50-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is an important regulator of cellular energy ho- meostasis. AMPK coordinates the regulation of metabolic pathways, including glucose uptake and utilization as well as oxidation of fats, in response to changes in the relative abundance of AMP and ATP. AMPK is activated by AMP and inhibited by ATP, making it directly respon- sive to the AMP/ATP ratio, an indicator of en- ergy availability in the cell (Hardie 2007). Sev- eral cellular stresses activate AMPK by affecting the AMP/ATP ratio, including starvation, im- paired mitochondrial respiration, and hypoxia. Other stresses, such as DNA damage, inhibit AMPK without affecting the AMP/ATP ratio (Budanov and Karin 2008). Most studies examining the role of AMPK in aging suggest that activation of AMPK is as- sociated with increased longevity and improved health span. Overexpression of one of twoworm orthologs of the AMPK-a subunit, AAK-2, is sufﬁcient to extend life span, and deletion of aak-2 prevents life-span extension in response to certain forms of DR (Apfeld et al. 2004; Schulz et al. 2007; Greer and Brunet 2009). More recently, it has been shown in ﬂies that activation of AMPK in neurons or intestine in- creases life span and slows aging in a non-cell- autonomous manner (Ulgherait et al. 2014). In mice, chronic activation of AMPK protects against diet-induced obesity (Yang et al. 2008), and two related AMPK activators, phenformin and metformin, have also been reported to en- hance longevity in mice (Dilman and Anisimov 1980; Anisimov et al. 2003; Martin-Montalvo et al. 2013) and worms (Onken and Driscoll 2010). Metformin is the most widely prescribed antidiabetic drug in theworld. Itclearlyenhanc- es life expectancy for diabetic patients, and there is some suggestive evidence that diabetics taking metformin may live longer than nondiabetics (Bannister et al. 2014). One of the challenges associated with in- terpreting the effects of metformin is that, un- like rapamycin, it is a relatively “dirty drug.” The mechanism by which metformin activates AMPK is indirect and poorly understood, and it is unclear whether the effects of metformin on life span and health span are directly mediated solely through AMPK or also through “off-tar- get” effects. For example, metformin is also an inhibitorofcomplexIofthemitochondrialelec- tron transport chain (El-Mir et al. 2000; Owen et al. 2000) and, in worms, has been suggested toincreaselifespanthroughreducingfolatepro- duction by the gut microbiota (Cabreiro et al. 2013) and through activation of the peroxire- doxin PRDX-2 via a mitochondrial stress re- sponse (mitohormesis, discussed below) (De Haes et al. 2014). Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 (IGF-1) Signaling The insulin/IGF-1-like signaling axis (IIS) is perhaps the best-studied longevity pathway, A. Bitto et al. 8 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from and is known to regulate longevity in worms, ﬂies, mice, and perhaps humans. The genetic and biochemical features of this pathway were ﬁrst worked out in C. elegans, and later studies showed a similar overall structure in ﬂies and mammals (Fontana et al. 2010; Kenyon 2011). Insulin and insulin-like peptides are the main determinants of development, growth, and body size in animals, with highly conserved genes across the evolutionary spectrum. In in- vertebrate animals, the insulin receptor regu- lates the response to nutrients as well as growth and development (Fernandez et al. 1995; Ki- mura et al. 1997; Edgar 2006). In vertebrates, insulin generally regulates nutrient consump- tion and storage, and IGF-1 promotes growth and proliferation (Upton et al. 1997; Reinecke and Collet 1998). IGF-1 is also responsive to nutrients, although indirectly: nutrients stimu- late production of the hypothalamic growth- hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) (Gelato and Merriam 1986) and Ghrelin, a hormone produced by the digestive system (Kojima et al. 1999). These two hormones signal to the so- matotropic cells of the anterior pituitary gland and promote the release of growth hormone (GH) (Forsyth and Wallis 2002), which, in turn, stimulates the production of IGF-1 in the liver and in peripheral tissues. Ghrelin, GHRH, and GH add a further level of complexity to growth, size, and aging regulation invertebrates. IGF-1 promotes cell growth, proliferation, and cell-cycle progression by engaging the IGF-1 receptor(IGF-1R).TheIGF-1RactivatestheTOR pathway (Oldham and Hafen 2003), promotes cell survival via AKT (Song et al. 2005), curtails stress responses and cell-cycle arrest by inhibiting the transcription factor FoxO (Stitt et al. 2004), and can activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway through p66Shc (Mi- gliaccio et al. 1999; Giorgio et al. 2012). The IISwas ﬁrst implicated in aging with the discovery that loss-of-function mutations in the C. elegans phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase gene age-1 and the insulin-like receptor gene daf-2 could double life span, and this life-span exten- sion was dependent on the FOXO-family tran- scription factor DAF-16 (Friedman and John- son 1988; Kenyon et al. 1993; Dorman et al. 1995). Both daf-2 and daf-16 had been previ- ously implicated in control of entry into the C. elegans dauer, a stress-resistant developmen- tally arrested alternative developmental state (Vowels and Thomas 1992). At the time their role in longevity control was discovered, the genes for age-1, daf-2, and daf-16 had not yet been cloned, and it was not until afew years later that the homologies to the mammalian proteins were appreciated (Morris et al. 1996; Kimura et al. 1997; Ogg et al. 1997). Additionally, com- ponents of the pathway were subsequently iden- tiﬁed in worms (Tissenbaum and Ruvkun 1998), and similar effects were reported for mu- tations that reduce IIS in ﬂies (Clancy et al. 2001; Tatar et al. 2001; Tu et al. 2002). In mice, longer life span and delayed aging have been recorded in Ames dwarf, Snell dwarf, GH-receptor knockout (GHRKO), GHRHKO, GHRH receptor mutants (GHRHRlit), and, to alesserextent,inIGF-1Rþ/2 mice(Brown-Borg et al. 1996; Coschigano et al. 2000; Flurkey et al. 2001; Holzenberger et al. 2003; Liou et al. 2013) and IGF-1-deﬁcient mice (Lorenzini et al. 2013). Ames dwarf and Snell dwarf mice pro- duce low amounts of GH, prolactin, and thy- roid-stimulating hormone owing to mutations that impair the development of the anterior pi- tuitary gland, and together with GHRKO mice have extremely reducedlevels of circulating IGF- 1 (Bartke 2005). Conversely, IGF-1 levels are el- evated in IGF-1Rþ/2 mice, probably because of lack of negative feedback on GH release, but in- tracellular signaling through AKTand p66Shc is dampened in these animals (Holzenberger et al. 2003). IIS mutant mice display higher levels and activity of antioxidant enzymes (Brown-Borg et al. 1999; Brown-Borg and Rakoczy 2000; Hauck and Bartke 2000) and their cells show increasedresistancetooxidativestressinculture. In fact, reducing IIS in mice inhibits p66Shc, ac- tivates the phase 2 antioxidant response via NFE2L2 (Nrf2) (Holzenberger et al. 2003; Mu- rakami et al. 2003; Salmon et al. 2005; Leiserand Miller 2010; Sun et al. 2011), and possibly acti- vates the FoxO transcription factor (Nemoto and Finkel2002). Furthermore,reducedIISpro- tects mice against age-related pathologies, such as Alzheimer’s disease (Cohen et al. 2009). Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 9 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from In addition to increased stress resistance, animals with defective GH signaling have al- tered metabolism, as evidenced by increased insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance, re- duced fat accumulation, resistance to high-fat diets, and increased oxidative metabolism and fatty acid oxidation, especially at older ages (Bartke and Westbrook 2012). Some of these phenotypes are recapitulated in IGF-1Rþ/2 and IGF-1-deﬁcient mice, such as resistance to high-fat diets and reduced fat accumulation, even though both of these models present slight impairments in glucose homeostasis (Holzen- berger et al. 2003; Salmon et al. 2015). Because metabolism is regulated by a limited number of endocrine organs in metazoans, these observa- tions suggest that IIS inﬂuences aging both via cell-autonomous mechanisms, such as stress re- sistance, and nonautonomous ones. This dual role for IIS is supported by several bodies of evidence. First, life-span extension and delayed aging are more prominent in pituitary-deﬁcient and GHRKO mice, which have speciﬁc defects in the somatotropic axis, than in the general, broad-targeting, IGF-1Rþ/2 and IGF-1-deﬁ- cient mice, in which the beneﬁcial effects of the mutations are reduced in magnitude and mostly restricted to female animals (Holzen- bergeret al. 2003; Lorenzini et al. 2013). Second, mutations in the IIS pathway can extend life span even when they occur only in select endo- crine organs, such as adipose tissue in ﬂies and mice, or intestine and neurons in C. elegans, thus suggesting that reducing speciﬁc endocrine signaling is as effective as a general suppression of growth-factor signaling (Kenyon 2005). This may explain the apparent dichotomy between the speciﬁc effects of GH and IGF-1 supplemen- tation on one side, and the long-lived pheno- type of reduced GH and IGF-1-signaling mu- tants on the other side. Although reducing systemic GH and IGF-1 signaling promotes lon- gevity by improving metabolism and raising cellular defenses to stress, high local levels of IGF-1 could protect speciﬁc tissues against damage and apoptosis, which is especially det- rimental in postmitotic tissues, such as mus- cle, heart, and brain (Bartke 2008). Interesting- ly, Ames mice show increased levels of IGF-1 in the brain (Sun et al. 2005a,b), and IGF-1 protects against age-related decline in heart function (Moellendorf et al. 2012), further sup- porting this hypothesis. This evidence not- withstanding, elevated local IGF-1 may still have detrimental effects for longevity, as indi- cated by the long-lived phenotype of mice lack- ing the pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A), a serum metalloprotease that in- creases peripheral activity of IGF-1 by cleaving IGF-1-binding proteins (IGF-BPs) (Conover and Bale 2007). The impact of GH and IGF-1 on longevity may thus be exquisitely tissue spe- ciﬁc. GHR tissue-speciﬁc knockout mice have been developed, including fat, macrophage, liv- er, muscle, and b-cell-speciﬁc knockouts, and it will be of particular interest to see which of these animals have altered longevity and health span (Sun and Bartke 2013). Mitochondrial Stress and Antioxidants Mitochondrial function has long been thought to be important for healthy aging. Indeed, the ﬁrst molecular theory of aging proposed that free radicals, produced in part through mito- chondrial metabolic processes, were the prima- ry cause of age-related damage and declines in cellular function (Harman 1956). In recent years, the idea that mitochondrial oxidative stress has a purely negative effect on age-related parameters has been revised, based on a grow- ing body of evidence supporting the idea that mitochondrial stress and reactive oxygen spe- cies (ROS) can also induce protective mecha- nisms in addition to damage (Bennett and Kaeberlein 2014), an idea referred to as “mito- hormesis” (Ristow and Zarse 2010). In addi- tion, several life-span-extending mutations have been identiﬁed that impair mitochondrial function, suggesting a complex relationship be- tween longevity and mitochondria. Loss-of-function alleles of the genes encod- ing the Rieske iron sulfur protein isp-1 and the coenzyme Q biosynthetic gene clk-1 increase life span in worms (Felkai et al. 1999; Feng et al. 2001). Furthermore, genome-wide RNAi stud- ies in C. elegans provide direct evidence that decreasing mitochondrial respiration enhances A. Bitto et al. 10 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from longevity (Hwang et al. 2012; Yanos et al. 2012). RNAi clones corresponding to numerous com- ponents of the mitochondrial electron trans- port chain were found to extend life span when knockdown was initiated during develop- ment (Dillin et al. 2002; Lee et al. 2003). Lim- ited examples of life-span extension from inhi- bition of mitochondrial function have also been described in fruit ﬂies (Copeland et al. 2009; Owusu-Ansah et al. 2013) and mice (Hughes and Hekimi 2011; Wang et al. 2012), although these appear to be far less common than in C. elegans. This may be partially explained by the lack of apoptosis in adult C. elegans, which allows worms to maintain somatic tissue in the presence of increased oxidative damage. In all cases, severe mitochondrial dysfunction leads to reduced survival, consistent with the central idea of mitohormesis that a little mitochondrial stress is protective, although a large degree of mitochondrial stress is detrimental. This con- cept has been further tested in studies showing that treatment with low doses of paraquat, which produce mitochondrial ROS in the form of superoxide, is sufﬁcient to enhance longevity in worms (Yang and Hekimi 2010; Hwang et al. 2014). Although inhibition of mitochondrial res- piration appears to be a conserved prolongevity strategy, the mechanistic basis for this life-span extension remains obscure, and the degree to which similar mechanisms are engaged in dif- ferent organisms is unclear (Bennett et al. 2014a). It was initially suggested that mitochon- drial inhibition extends life span in C. elegans through generation of a neuronal signal that is propagated to the intestine and other tissues to induce the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt), which up-regulates mito- chondrial-speciﬁc chaperones and proteases (Durieux et al. 2011). The neuronal mitochon- drial signal has not yet been identiﬁed; however, one study in ﬂies suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction in muscle can also induce a prolon- gevity signal in that organism (Owusu-Ansah et al. 2013). The model that the UPRmt pro- motes longevity has since been weakened, how- ever, with the ﬁnding that induction of the UPRmt is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for life-span extension in worms (Bennett et al. 2014b). Despite the lack of causal evidence that the UPRmt mediates enhanced longevity, mitochondrial stress in long-lived ﬂies and mice is capable of activating the UPRmt in cer- tain tissues, akin to C. elegans (Owusu-Ansah et al. 2013; Pulliam et al. 2014). Thus, the UPRmt may be one response that is induced to regulate mitochondrial proteostasis in conjunc- tion with others that directly promote longevity. Several groups have attempted to deﬁne the mechanistic basis for life-span extension from electron transport chain (ETC) inhibition in C. elegans, resulting in the identiﬁcation of mul- tiple transcription factors that are required for enhanced longevity in a subset of cases. These include AHA-1, CEH-18, CEH-23, CEP-1, GCN-2, HIF-1, JUN-1, NHR-27, NHR-49, and TAF-4 (Ventura et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2010a; Walter et al. 2011; Baker et al. 2012; Khan et al. 2013). Of these, hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is particularly interesting, as HIF-1 serves as a major transcriptional regula- tor of the hypoxic response, which is highly conserved in metazoans (Leiser and Kaeberlein 2010). HIF-1 is activated in response to low levels of ROS produced by some forms of mito- chondrial inhibition (Lee et al. 2010a), and activation of HIF-1, either through genetic ma- nipulation or hypoxic conditioning, is sufﬁ- cient to extend the life span in C. elegans (Mehta et al. 2009; Mulleret al. 2009; Zhang et al. 2009a; Leiser et al. 2011, 2013). In addition, HIF-1 can be activated in mammalian cells by metabolites that are enriched in C. elegans mitochondrial mutants, suggesting multiple mechanisms that may impinge on HIF-1 during mitochondrial dysfunction (Lu et al. 2005; Butler et al. 2013). Chronic activation of HIF-1 in humans causes Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome and is, there- fore, unlikely to improve longevity or health span (Ivan and Kaelin 2001). However, it re- mains possible that tissue-speciﬁc activation of HIF-1 or activation of a subset of HIF-1 tar- get genes could be beneﬁcial for longevity in mammals. Recently, another mechanism for life-span extension from inhibition of respira- tion in C. elegans has been proposed involving the activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 11 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from (Yee et al. 2014), but whether this mechanism plays any role in aging in other organisms is yet to be determined. Anotheraspect of mitohormesis that should be considered is the role of antioxidant systems in coping with oxidative stress. Studies impli- cating mitohormesis with increased antioxidant capacity were ﬁrst described in C. elegans using both inhibitors of glycolysis and knockdown of daf-2 (Schulz et al. 2007; Zarse et al. 2012). These interventions were found to increase mi- tochondrial respiration, cause a burst of ROS, and increase cellular antioxidant activity. This response and the associated life-span extensions were proposed to be mediated by SKN-1 and PMK-1. SKN-1 is the worm homolog of the NFE2L2 (Nrf2) transcription factorof the phase 2 detoxiﬁcation response, which controls ex- pression of antioxidant and glutathione biosyn- thesis genes, whereas PMK-1 is a p38 MAPK homolog that regulates SKN-1 nuclear localiza- tion and activity under oxidative stress con- ditions (Inoue et al. 2005). Overexpression of SKN-1 is sufﬁcient to extend life span in C. elegans (Tullet et al. 2008). Additionally, ﬂies with reduced expression of the Nrf2 negative regulator Keap1 show enhanced paraquat resis- tance and life-span extension (Sykiotis and Bohmann 2008). The role of Nrf2/SKN-1in aging of mam- mals is correlative but compelling. In rodents, Nrf2 activity decreases with age (Suh et al. 2004; Shih and Yen 2007), conceivably leading to in- creased oxidative damage. In addition, DR and many DR mimetics activate Nrf2 and increase antioxidant capacity of mice (Martin-Montalvo et al. 2011). However, Nrf2 KO mice still receive beneﬁts from DR, such as increased insulin sen- sitivityand similar increased life span compared with wild-type controls (Pearson et al. 2008). Whether Nrf2 mediates any of the health bene- ﬁts of the long-lived mitochondrial mutant mice models is still an open question. For ex- ample, mice lacking the ETC chaperone Surf1 show Nrf2 activation in cardiac tissue (Pulliam et al. 2014), but whether this is beneﬁcial to cardiac aging or is just an indicator of mito- chondrial dysfunction in this background is unknown. Nevertheless, activation of Nrf2 and otherantioxidant pathways is acommon feature of several long-lived mouse models (Leiser and Miller 2010; Sun et al. 2011; Michael et al. 2012), and Nrf2 mediates at least some of the prolongevity effects of rapamycin in vitro (Ler- ner et al. 2013), suggesting that this transcrip- tion factor may actually play an active role in enhancing health span. A similar case could be drawn for p66shc, a mediator of GH/IGF-1 signaling (see above) that regulates oxidative stress responses. Al- though its ablation increases resistance to oxi- dative and genotoxic stress, and was shown to extend life span in laboratory mice (Migliaccio et al. 1999), more recent studies have brought into question the long-lived phenotypes of p66shc knockout mice (Giorgio et al. 2012; Ram- sey et al. 2014), suggesting a complex relation- ship between oxidative stress, stress resistance, and longevity. For many years, it was conventional wisdom that antioxidants should have a beneﬁcial effect on longevity and health. The mitohormesis model and supporting data would suggest this idea is overly simplistic, and the actual data showing a direct relationship between exoge- nous treatment with antioxidants and longevity or health span in any species is quite limited. In mammals, the strongest evidence in support of the idea that boosting antioxidant capacity can improve healthy aging comes from studies of mice transgenically expressing mitochondrial targeted human catalase (MCAT). Catalase cat- alyzes the breakdown of H2O2 and normally functions within the peroxisome. MCAT mice show increases in life span and decreases in car- diac pathology, inﬂammation, and tumor bur- den (Schriner et al. 2005; Dai et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2010b). Furthermore, MCAT mice main- tain better muscle function with age owing to reduced oxidation of ryanodine receptor 1, the Ca2þ release channel of the sarcoplasmic retic- ulum involved in muscle contraction (Uman- skaya et al. 2014). Ectopic expression of other antioxidant enzymes, such as thioredoxin-1, thioredoxin reductase, Mn superoxide dismut- ase (MnSOD), copper zinc superoxide dismut- ase (CuZnSOD), or nonmitochondrial catalase, doesnotcauserobustlife-span extensioninfruit A. Bitto et al. 12 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from ﬂies or mice, even in cases of combinatorial ex- pression (Mitsui et al. 2002; Orr et al. 2003; Jang et al. 2009; Perez et al. 2009, 2011). In both mice and worms, deletion of antioxidant enzymes in many cases does not shorten life span, despite causing substantial increases in oxidative dam- age to cells and tissues and striking sensitivity to oxidative stress (Van Raamsdonk and Hekimi 2009; Zhang et al. 2009b). Taken together, the bulk of data would seem to suggest that antiox- idant capacity does not seem to be generally limiting for life span of wild-type organisms. However, increased antioxidant capacity or im- provements in redox homeostasis, perhaps in speciﬁc cellular compartments, such as mito- chondria, can improve longevity and health during aging at least in some situations. CONNECTIONS BETWEEN CONSERVED ANTIAGING PATHWAYS: TOWARD A NETWORK VIEW OF AGING As mentioned in the introductory section, one of the general features of known conserved lon- gevity pathways is that they tend to regulate the relationship between environmental cues and growth and reproduction. Therefore, it is not surprising that all of the major conserved lon- gevity pathways have been proposed to play key roles in mediating the beneﬁcial effects of DR. In nonmammalian models, the case can best be made for inhibition of mTOR acting down- stream from DR, as mTOR is a direct sensor of amino acids (Bar-Peled and Sabatini 2014), and studies in yeast, worms, and ﬂies have indi- cated that inhibition of mTOR, or downstream processes regulated by mTOR, such as autoph- agy, are both necessary and sufﬁcient for life- span extension from DR (Kapahi et al. 2004; Kaeberlein et al. 2005a; Jia and Levine 2007; Morck and Pilon 2007; Zid et al. 2009). In mammals, the situation is probably more com- plex, and initial studies suggest that DR and rapamycin induce overlapping but distinct changes, suggesting that rapamycin treatment does not mimic every aspect of DR or vice versa (Fok et al. 2014). IIS and DR increase life span through over- lapping but also distinct mechanisms. DR and reduced IIS affect growth, metabolism, endo- crine signaling, and stress resistance in a similar way (Bartke et al. 2001; Yamaza et al. 2010), yet DR can further increase life span in Ames mice (Bartke et al. 2001), GHRHKO (Liou et al. 2013), and, to a lesser extent, in GHRKO mice (Bonkowski et al. 2006), suggesting that DR en- gages other pathways in addition to IIS. Simi- larly, DR increases life span in dFoxO2/2 ﬂies, although not to the extent of wild-type animals. In worms, several studies have reported that dif- ferent methods of DR are able to extend life span in a daf-16 null background, although re- moval of food is sufﬁcient to activate DAF-16 (Henderson and Johnson 2001), suggesting that the IIS pathway is engaged by DR in worms. Whether rapamycin or other DR mimetics further extend the life span of IIS-mutant or dietary-restricted mammals is still unknown. Preliminary evidence suggests that DR inhibits mTOR to promote the function of at least one stem-cell niche, the Paneth cells of the intestine (Yilmaz et al. 2012). In addition, S6K12/2 mice show several features typical of the IIS mutants or of mice under DR, such as reduced size, bet- ter insulin sensitivity, and improved glucose tol- erance at old ages, and have a gene expression proﬁle that overlap with IRS12/2 and dietary- restricted mice (Selman et al. 2009). Together with the observation that Ames dwarf mice have reduced mTOR signaling (Sharp and Bartke 2005), this evidence further suggests that DR, IIS, and TORextend longevity through overlap- ping pathways in mice too. A role for sirtuins in DR was ﬁrst suggested based on studies in yeast showing that deletion of Sir2 prevents replicative life-span extension from DR (Lin et al. 2000). Based on this obser- vation, Guarente and colleagues proposed that DR might activate sirtuins by increasing the availability of NADþ, a substrate of sirtuin- mediated deacetylation (Guarente and Picard 2005). The generality of this model has been weakened by subsequent reports that neither Sir2 nor the other yeast sirtuins are absolutely required for replicative life-span extension from DR in yeast, and that overexpression of Sir2 fur- ther increases life span in combination with DR (Kaeberlein et al. 2004, 2006; Tsuchiya et al. Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 13 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from 2006). Likewise, Sir2 is not required for chro- nological life-span extension from DR in yeast, and sir-2.1 is not required for life-span exten- sion from several different methods of DR in C. elegans (Kaeberlein and Powers 2007). In contrast, studies in mice have generally support- ed the idea that sirtuins, particularly SIRT1 and SIRT3 are activated in some tissues by DR and may be required for some of the health beneﬁts associated with this dietary regimen (Giblin et al. 2014). There is abundant evidence that mitochon- drial metabolism is altered in response to DR, although whether this is mechanistically related to the life-span extension seen in respiratory- deﬁcient animals is unclear. In C. elegans, inhi- bition of electron transport chain components only extends life span when knockdown is accomplished during development (Rea et al. 2007), whereas DR extends life span in C. ele- gans when initiated during adulthood (Smith et al. 2008b), suggesting that these are distinct longevity pathways. In yeast, mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial respiration are increased in response to DR (Lin et al. 2002), and similar effects have been reported in some tissues of mice and in cultured mammalian cells (Nisoli et al. 2005; Lopez-Lluch et al. 2006), further supporting the idea that mitochondrial inhibition extends life span by a mechanism distinct from that of DR. AMPK has also been implicated in mediat- ing mitochondrial and metabolic adaptation to DR. In worms, most forms of DR are dependent on aak-2 (Greer and Brunet 2009) and AMPK is necessary for the beneﬁcial effects of DR on cardiac function in mouse (Chen et al. 2012). Furthermore, metformin, an AMPK activator, induces metabolic changes in mouse liver and skeletal muscle consistent with those seen un- der caloric restriction, although not completely overlapping (Martin-Montalvo et al. 2013). These observations indicate that DR may exert some of its beneﬁcial effects through AMPK, although compelling evidence is still lacking, especially in mammals. Importantly, all of the pathways described above interact with each other, making it difﬁ- cult and perhaps unrealistic to pinpoint any individual factor as the sole or even the major mediator of DR. For example, both IGF-1 and AMPK can modulate the TOR pathway, and all three pathways can inﬂuence mitochondrial function and metabolism independently and in concert with one another (see above). Simi- larly, cross talk between the TOR pathway and several sirtuins has been found in vitro (Csibi et al. 2013; Hong et al. 2014), several proteins of the IGF-1R-signaling pathway are subject to deacetylation by sirtuins in vitro (Zhang 2007; Sundaresan et al. 2011), and AMPK can pro- mote sirtuin activity by increasing the levels of NADþ in mouse skeletal muscle (Canto et al. 2009). In addition, mitochondrial dys- function and ROS can activate TOR indepen- dent of growth factors and nutrients (Nacarelli et al. 2014). Together, these observations suggest that age-delaying interventions are likely to en- gage multiple pathways to some extent and that, although single gene perturbations may have sizable effects in term of health and longevity, no single factor is solely responsible for long- lived and healthy aging phenotypes. Important- ly, all of the above age-related pathways increase the activity of homeostatic mechanisms, such as authophagy and stress-resistance and de- toxiﬁcation enzymes. The importance of these mechanisms for aging phenotypes, as well as the cells and tissue most affected by their activity, are currently object of intense research and will likely help ﬁll in the blanks on the network of interaction that affect aging and age-related diseases. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS Over the past few decades, there have been nu- merous successes at identifying genetic factors that appear to modulate the rate of aging in evolutionarily divergent organisms. We now know of several conserved pathways and gene families that are key modulators of aging, and a picture of the network in which they interact is beginning to emerge. In the case of rapamy- cin, these advances have progressed to the point where we have a pharmacological intervention with the ability to extend life span and delay age-related declines in function in organisms A. Bitto et al. 14 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from from yeast to worms. Going forward, we an- ticipate these trends to continue, with the iden- tiﬁcation of additional longevity-promoting interventions and further advances in under- standing the molecular mechanisms of aging. A key challenge, however, will be developing strategies to successfully translate these discov- eries to improve human health span. One ap- proach is to attempt to validate the efﬁcacy of interventions, such as rapamycin, to treat age- related diseases in patients. Although this type of approach may be successful, it is unclear whether any beneﬁts will be obtained from de- laying aging in individuals whose health has already deteriorated to the point where clinical diagnosis has occurred. A more promising ap- proach is to test these interventions as preven- tative, or even rejuvenating, therapies in people. One good example of this is a recent placebo controlled study in which short-term treatment with low-dose rapamycin was found to improve the immune response to an inﬂuenza vaccine of otherwise healthy elderly people (Mannick et al. 2014). Although it remains unclear wheth- er these effects are mechanistically related to the life-span extension seen in mice following rapamycin treatment, this parallels prior work showing a similar rejuvenation of immune function in aged mice (Chen et al. 2009). Al- though this study does not show that the other positive effects of rapamycin on longevity and health span in mice will also be seen in humans, it is highly suggestive. In addition to examining the potential ben- eﬁts of rapamycin as a preventative measure for select age-related phenotypes in humans, we have recently proposed that a more comprehen- sive evaluation of rapamycin in a large mammal can be accomplished using the domestic dog Canis lupus familiaris (Check Hayden 2014). Companion dogs, in particular, have several ad- vantages as a model for human aging over lab- oratory organisms. These include a breadth of phenotypic and genetic diversity across breeds, a high quality of veterinary care and expertise, exposure to most of the same environmental conditions as people, susceptibility to many of the same diseases of aging as people, and life spans that are amenable to experimental time frames. For example, if rapamycin treatment initiated in middle age extends life span and health span in dogs similarly to the effects seen in mice, we might expect the average life span of a cohort of large-size dogs to increase from about 9 years to about 11 years if treat- ment were initiated at 6–7 years of age. Thus, a 5-year study would be more than sufﬁcient to document these effects if sufﬁciently powered. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Studies related to this topic in the Kaeberlein laboratory are supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grants AG038518, AG039390, and AG033598 to M.K. A.B. and A.M.W. are supported by NIH Grant T32AG000057. C.F.B. is supported by NIH Training Grant T32ES007032. REFERENCES Aguilaniu H, Gustafsson L, Rigoulet M, Nystrom T. 2003. Asymmetric inheritance of oxidatively damaged proteins during cytokinesis. Science 299: 1751–1753. Alcendor RR, Gao S, Zhai P, Zablocki D, Holle E, Yu X, Tian B, Wagner T, Vatner SF, Sadoshima J. 2007. Sirt1 regulates aging and resistance to oxidative stress in the heart. Circ Res 100: 1512–1521. Anisimov VN, Semenchenko AV, Yashin AI. 2003. Insulin and longevity: Antidiabetic biguanides as geroprotectors. Biogerontology 4: 297–307. Anisimov VN, Zabezhinski MA, Popovich IG, Piskunova TS, Semenchenko AV, Tyndyk ML, Yurova MN, Rosenfeld SV, Blagosklonny MV. 2011. Rapamycin increases life- span and inhibits spontaneous tumorigenesis in inbred female mice. Cell Cycle 10: 4230–4236. Aparicio OM, Billington BL, Gottschling DE. 1991. Modi- ﬁers of position effect are shared between telomeric and silent mating-type loci in S. cerevisiae. Cell 66: 1279– 1287. Apfeld J, O’Connor G, McDonagh T, DiStefano PS, Curtis R. 2004. The AMP-activated protein kinase AAK-2 links energy levels and insulin-like signals to lifespan in C. elegans. Genes Dev 18: 3004–3009. AshraﬁK, Sinclair D, Gordon JI, Guarente L. 1999. Passage through stationary phase advances replicative aging in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc Natl Acad Sci 96: 9100– 9105. Austad SN. 2009. Comparative biology of aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 64: 199–201. Bai H, Kang P, Hernandez AM, Tatar M. 2013. Activin signaling targeted by insulin/dFOXO regulates aging and muscle proteostasis in Drosophila. PLoS Genet 9: e1003941. Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 15 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from Baker BM, Nargund AM, Sun T, Haynes CM. 2012. Protec- tive coupling of mitochondrial function and protein synthesis via the eIF2a kinase GCN-2. PLoS Genet 8: e1002760. Bannister CA, Holden SE, Jenkins-Jones S, Morgan CL, Halcox JP, Schernthaner G, Mukherjee J, Currie CJ. 2014. Can people with type 2 diabetes live longer than those without? A comparison of mortality in people ini- tiated with metformin or sulphonylurea monotherapy and matched, non-diabetic controls. Diabetes Obes Metab 16: 1165–1173. Bar-Peled L, Sabatini DM. 2014. Regulation of mTORC1 by amino acids. Trends Cell Biol 24: 400–406. Bartke A. 2005. Minireview: Role of the growth hormone/ insulin-like growth factor system in mammalian aging. Endocrinology 146: 3718–3723. Bartke A. 2008. Growth hormone and aging: A challenging controversy. Clin Interv Aging 3: 659–665. Bartke A, Westbrook R. 2012. Metabolic characteristics of long-lived mice. Front Genet 3: 288. Bartke A, Wright J, Mattison J, Ingram D, Miller R, Roth G. 2001. Extending the lifespan of long-lived mice. Nature 414: 412. Bass TM, Weinkove D, Houthoofd K, Gems D, Partridge L. 2007. Effects of resveratrol on lifespan in Drosophila mel- anogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans. Mech Ageing Dev 128: 546–552. Baur JA, Pearson KJ, Price NL, Jamieson HA, Lerin C, Kalra A, Prabhu VV, Allard JS, Lopez-Lluch G, Lewis K, et al. 2006. Resveratrol improves health and survival of mice on a high-calorie diet. Nature 444: 337–342. Bennett CF, Kaeberlein M. 2014. The mitochondrial unfold- ed protein response and increased longevity: Cause, con- sequence, or correlation? Exp Gerontol 56: 142–146. Bennett CF, Choi H, Kaeberlein M. 2014a. Searching for the elusive mitochondrial longevity signal in C. elegans. Worm 3: e959404. Bennett CF, Vander Wende H, Simko M, Klum S, Barﬁeld S, Choi H, Pineda VV, Kaeberlein M. 2014b. Activation of the mitochondrial unfolded protein response does not predict longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Commun 5: 3483. Bjedov I, Toivonen JM, Kerr F, Slack C, Jacobson J, Foley A, Partridge L. 2010. Mechanisms of life span extension by rapamycin in the fruit ﬂy Drosophila melanogaster. Cell Metab 11: 35–46. Bonkowski M, Rocha J, Masternak M, Al Regaiey K, Bartke A. 2006. Targeted disruption of growth hormone recep- tor interferes with the beneﬁcial actions of calorie restric- tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci 103: 7901–7905. Bordone L, Cohen D, Robinson A, Motta MC, van Veen E, Czopik A, Steele AD, Crowe H, Marmor S, Luo J, et al. 2007. SIRT1 transgenic mice show phenotypes resem- bling calorie restriction. Aging Cell 6: 759–767. Borra MT, Smith BC, Denu JM. 2005. Mechanism of human SIRT1 activation by resveratrol. J Biol Chem 280: 17187– 17195. Brown-Borg H, Rakoczy S. 2000. Catalase expression in de- layed and premature aging mouse models. Exp Gerontol 35: 199–212. Brown-Borg H, Borg K, Meliska C, Bartke A. 1996. Dwarf mice and the ageing process. Nature 384: 33. Brown-Borg H, Bode A, Bartke A. 1999. Antioxidative mechanisms and plasma growth hormone levels: Poten- tial relationship in the aging process. Endocrine 11: 41–48. Budanov AV, Karin M. 2008. p53 target genes sestrin1 and sestrin2 connect genotoxic stress and mTOR signaling. Cell 134: 451–460. Burnett C, Valentini S, Cabreiro F, Goss M, Somogyvari M, Piper MD, Hoddinott M, Sutphin GL, Leko V, McElwee JJ, et al. 2011. Absence of effects of Sir2 overexpression on lifespan in C. elegans and Drosophila. Nature 477: 482– 485. Burtner CR, Murakami CJ, Kennedy BK, Kaeberlein M. 2009. A molecular mechanism of chronological aging in yeast. Cell Cycle 8: 1256–1270. Burtner CR, Murakami CJ, Olsen B, Kennedy BK, Kaeber- lein M. 2011. A genomic analysis of chronological lon- gevity factors in budding yeast. Cell Cycle 10: 1385–1396. Butler JA, Mishur RJ, Bhaskaran S, Rea SL. 2013. A meta- bolic signature for long life in the Caenorhabditis elegans Mit mutants. Aging Cell 12: 130–138. Cabreiro F, Au C, Leung KY, Vergara-Irigaray N, Cocheme HM, Noori T, Weinkove D, Schuster E, Greene ND, Gems D. 2013. Metformin retards aging in C. elegans by altering microbial folate and methionine metabolism. Cell 153: 228–239. Canto C, Gerhart-Hines Z, Feige JN, Lagouge M, Noriega L, Milne JC, Elliott PJ, Puigserver P, Auwerx J. 2009. AMPK regulates energy expenditure by modulating NADþ me- tabolism and SIRT1 activity. Nature 458: 1056–1060. Carson CT, Lynne C, Heather RK, Tim W, Nathanael SG, David MS. 2012. A unifying model for mTORC1- mediated regulation of mRNA translation. Nature 485: 109–113. Chang HC, Guarente L. 2014. SIRT1 and other sirtuins in metabolism. Trends Endocrinol Metab 25: 138–145. Charest P, Shen Z, Lakoduk A, Sasaki A, Briggs S, Firtel R. 2010. A Ras signaling complex controls the RasC-TORC2 pathway and directed cell migration. Dev Cell 18: 737–749. Check Hayden E. 2014. Pet dogs set to test anti-ageing drug. Nature 514: 546. Chen C, Liu Y, Zheng P. 2009. mTOR regulation and ther- apeutic rejuvenation of aging hematopoietic stem cells. Sci Signal 2: ra75. Chen K, Kobayashi S, Xu X, Viollet B, Liang Q. 2012. AMP activated protein kinase is indispensable for myocardial adaptation to caloric restriction in mice. PLoS ONE 8: e59682. Cho J, Hur JH, Walker DW. 2011. The role of mitochondria in Drosophila aging. Exp Gerontol 46: 331–334. Clancy DJ, Gems D, Harshman LG, Oldham S, Stocker H, Hafen E, Leevers SJ, Partridge L. 2001. Extension of life- span by loss of CHICO, a Drosophila insulin receptor substrate protein. Science 292: 104–106. Cohen E, Paulsson J, Blinder P, Burstyn-Cohen T, Du D, Estepa G, Adame A, Pham H, Holzenberger M, Kelly J, et al. 2009. Reduced IGF-1 signaling delays age-associated proteotoxicity in mice. Cell 139: 1157–1169. A. Bitto et al. 16 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from Conover CA, Bale LK. 2007. Loss of pregnancy-associated plasma protein A extends lifespan in mice. Aging Cell 6: 727–729. Copeland JM, Cho J, Lo T Jr, Hur JH, Bahadorani S, Arabyan T, Rabie J, Soh J, Walker DW. 2009. Extension of Droso- phila life span by RNAi of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Curr Biol 19: 1591–1598. Coschigano K, Clemmons D, Bellush L, Kopchick J. 2000. Assessment of growth parameters and life span of GHR/ BP gene-disrupted mice. Endocrinology 141: 2608–2613. Coschigano KT, Holland AN, Riders ME, List EO, Flyvbjerg A, Kopchick JJ. 2003. Deletion, but not antagonism, of the mouse growth hormone receptor results in severely decreased body weights, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor I levels and increased life span. Endocrinology 144: 3799–3810. Csibi A, Fendt SMM, Li C, Poulogiannis G, Choo AY, Chap- ski DJ, Jeong SM, Dempsey JM, Parkhitko A, Morrison T, et al. 2013. The mTORC1 pathway stimulates glutamine metabolism and cell proliferation by repressing SIRT4. Cell 153: 840–854. Dai DF, Santana LF, Vermulst M, Tomazela DM, Emond MJ, MacCoss MJ, Gollahon K, Martin GM, Loeb LA, Ladiges WC, et al. 2009. Overexpression of catalase targeted to mitochondria attenuates murine cardiac aging. Circula- tion 119: 2789–2797. Dai DF, Karunadharma PP, Chiao YA, Basisty N, Crispin D, Hsieh EJ, Chen T, Gu H, Djukovic D, Raftery D, et al. 2014. Altered proteome turnover and remodeling by short-term caloric restriction or rapamycin rejuvenate the aging heart. Aging Cell 13: 529–539. Defossez PA, Park PU, Guarente L. 1998. Vicious circles: A mechanism for yeast aging. Curr Opin Microbiol 1: 707– 711. Defossez PA, Prusty R, Kaeberlein M, Lin SJ, Ferrigno P, Silver PA, Keil RL, Guarente L. 1999. Elimination of rep- lication block protein Fob1 extends the life span of yeast mother cells. Mol Cell 3: 447–455. De Haes W, Frooninckx L, Van Assche R, Smolders A, Dep- uydt G, Billen J, Braeckman BP, Schoofs L, Temmerman L. 2014. Metformin promotes lifespan through mito- hormesis via the peroxiredoxin PRDX-2. Proc Natl Acad Sci 111: E2501–E2509. Delaney JR, Murakami C, Chou A, Carr D, Schleit J, Sutphin GL, An EH, Castanza AS, Fletcher M, Goswami S, et al. 2013. Dietary restriction and mitochondrial function link replicative and chronological aging in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Exp Gerontol 48: 1006–1013. Dillin A, Hsu AL, Arantes-Oliveira N, Lehrer-Graiwer J, Hsin H, Fraser AG, Kamath RS, Ahringer J, Kenyon C. 2002. Rates of behavior and aging speciﬁed by mitochon- drial function during development. Science 298: 2398– 2401. Dilman VM, Anisimov VN. 1980. Effect of treatment with phenformin, diphenylhydantoin or L-dopa on life span and tumour incidence in C3H/Sn mice. Gerontology 26: 241–246. Dorman JB,Albinder B,Shroyer T, Kenyon C. 1995. The age- 1 and daf-2 genes function in a common pathway to control the lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 141: 1399–1406. Du J, Zhou Y, Su X, Yu JJ, Khan S, Jiang H, Kim J, Woo J, Kim JH, Choi BH, et al. 2011. Sirt5 is a NAD-dependent pro- tein lysine demalonylase and desuccinylase. Science 334: 806–809. Durieux J, Wolff S, Dillin A. 2011. The cell-non-autono- mous nature of electron transport chain-mediated lon- gevity. Cell 144: 79–91. Edgar B. 2006. How ﬂies get their size: Genetics meets phys- iology. Nat Rev Genet 7: 907–916. Egilmez NK, Jazwinski SM. 1989. Evidence for the involve- ment of a cytoplasmic factor in the aging of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Bacteriol 171: 37–42. El-Mir MY, Nogueira V, Fontaine E, Averet N, Rigoulet M, Leverve X. 2000. Dimethylbiguanide inhibits cell respira- tion via an indirect effect targeted on the respiratory chain complex I. J Biol Chem 275: 223–228. Erjavec N, Nystrom T. 2007. Sir2p-dependent protein seg- regation gives rise to a superior reactive oxygen species management in the progeny of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc Natl Acad Sci 104: 10877–10881. Erjavec N, Larsson L, Grantham J, Nystrom T. 2007. Accel- erated aging and failure to segregate damaged proteins in Sir2 mutants can be suppressed by overproducing the protein aggregation-remodeling factor Hsp104p. Genes Dev 21: 2410–2421. Fabrizio P, Longo VD. 2007. The chronological life span of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Methods Mol Biol 371: 89–95. Fabrizio P, Pozza F, Pletcher SD, Gendron CM, Longo VD. 2001. Regulation of longevity and stress resistance by Sch9 in yeast. Science 292: 288–290. Felkai S, Ewbank JJ, Lemieux J, Labbe JC, Brown GG, He- kimi S. 1999. CLK-1 controls respiration, behavior and aging in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. EMBO J 18: 1783–1792. Feng J, Bussiere F, Hekimi S. 2001. Mitochondrial electron transport is a key determinant of life span in Caenorhab- ditis elegans. Dev Cell 1: 633–644. Fernandez R, Tabarini D, Azpiazu N, Frasch M, Schlessinger J. 1995. The Drosophila insulin receptor homolog: A gene essential for embryonic development encodes two recep- tor isoforms with different signaling potential. EMBO J 14: 3373–3384. Finkel T, Deng CX, Mostoslavsky R. 2009. Recent progress in the biology and physiology of sirtuins. Nature 460: 587– 591. Firestein R, Blander G, Michan S, Oberdoerffer P, Ogino S, Campbell J, Bhimavarapu A, Luikenhuis S, de Cabo R, Fuchs C, et al. 2008. The SIRT1 deacetylase suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis and colon cancer growth. PLoS ONE 3: e2020. Flurkey K, Papaconstantinou J, Miller R, Harrison D. 2001. Lifespan extension and delayed immune and collagen aging in mutant mice with defects in growth hormone production. Proc Natl Acad Sci 98: 6736–6741. Flynn JM, O’Leary MN, Zambataro CA, Academia EC, Pres- ley MP, Garrett BJ, Zykovich A, Mooney SD, Strong R, Rosen CJ, et al. 2013. Late-life rapamycin treatment re- verses age-related heart dysfunction. Aging Cell 12: 851– 862. Fok WC, Bokov A, Gelfond J, Yu Z, Zhang Y, Doderer M, Chen Y, Javors M, Wood WH III, Zhang Y, et al. 2014. Conserved Pathways of Aging Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015;5:a025114 17 www.perspectivesinmedicine.org on May 13, 2026 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/ Downloaded from Combined treatment of rapamycin and dietary restric- tion has a larger effect on the transcriptome and metab- olome of liver. Aging Cell 13: 311–319. Fontana L, Partridge L, Longo VD. 2010. Extending healthy life span—From yeast to humans. Science 328: 321–326. Forsyth I, Wallis M. 2002. Growth hormone and prolactin— Molecular and functional evolution. J Mamm Gland Biol Neoplasia 7: 291–312. Friedman DB, Johnson TE. 1988. A mutation in the age-1 gene in Caenorhabditis elegans lengthens life and reduces hermaphrodite fertility. Genetics 118: 75–86. Fritze CE, Verschueren K, Strich R, Easton Esposito R. 1997. Direct evidence for SIR2 modulation of chromatin struc- ture in yeast rDNA. EMBO J 16: 6495–6509. Frye RA. 2000. Phylogenetic classiﬁcation of prokaryotic and eukaryotic Sir2-like proteins. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 273: 793–798. Garcı´a-Martı´nez J, Alessi D. 2008. mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) controls hydrophobic motif phosphoryla- tion and activation of serum- and glucocorticoid-in- duced protein kinase 1 (SGK1). Biochem J 416: 375–385. Gelato M, Merriam G. 1986. Growth hormone releasing hormone. Annu Rev Physiol 48: 569–591. Gershon H, Gershon D. 2000. Paradigms in aging research: A critical review and assessment. Mech Ageing Dev 117: 21–28. Giblin W, Skinner ME, Lombard DB. 2014. Sirtuins: Guard- ians of mammalian healthspan. Trends Genet 30: 271– 286. Giorgio M, Berry A, Berniakovich I, Poletaeva I, Trinei M, Stendardo M, Hagopian K, Ramsey J, Cortopassi G, Mi- gliaccio E, et al. 2012. The p66Shc knocked out mice are short lived under natural condition. Aging Cell 11: 162– 168. Gottlieb S, Esposito RE. 1989. A new role for a yeast tran- scriptional silencer gene, SIR2, in regulation of recombi- nation in ribosomal DNA. Cell 56: 771–776. Greer EL, Brunet A. 2009. Different dietary restriction regimens extend lifespan by both independent and over- lapping genetic pathways in C. elegans. Aging Cell 8: 113– 127. Guarente L, Picard F. 2005. Calorie restriction—The SIR2 connection. Cell 120: 473–482. Haigis MC, Mostoslavsky R, Haigis KM, Fahie K, Christo- doulou DC, Murphy AJ, Valenzuela DM, Yancopoulos GD, Karow M, Blander G, et al. 2006. SIRT4 inhibits glutamate dehydrogenase and opposes the effects of cal- orie restriction in pancreatic b cells. Cell 126: 941–954. Halloran J, Hussong S, Burbank R, Podlutskaya N, Fischer K, Sloane L, Austad SN, Strong R, Richardson A, Hart M, et al. 2012. Chronic inhibition of mammali